The Value of Identity




“What is truly Scandinavian? Absolutely nothing” ran a provocative ad promoting Scandinavian Airlines in 2020.1

Many Scandinavians were not amused. Although Scandinavian Airlines has been described as “an icon of Norwegian-Swedish-Danish cooperation,” their ad somehow managed to unite citizens of these three countries in sharp criticism of the company.

The ad described how things that are globally considered staples of Nordic identity, like Danish pastries and Swedish meatballs, were all invented elsewhere. It showed citizens from these countries looking depressed and forlorn as they learn that various sources of national and regional pride were, well, ripped off from entrepreneurs, inventors, and civil rights leaders in other nations.

“We take everything we like from our trips abroad, adjust it a little bit, and voilà! It’s a unique Scandinavian thing.” The ad concluded with the suggestion that travel enriches these countries’ citizens and their cultural heritage, and hence true Scandinavians should purchase airline tickets forthwith and go out to explore the world.

As an attempt at identity-based inspiration, the ad was a woeful failure. It managed to foster a degree of public outrage toward an airline advertisement that is probably unprecedented. Several conservative politicians swore never to fly with them again. And the reaction was magnified by thousands of citizens on social media. When we watched the ad on YouTube, it had over 131,000 thumbs-down symbols, more than ten times the number of people who gave it a thumbs-up.

Company officials eventually pulled the ad and said they were proud of their Scandinavian heritage. They regretted that their message had been misunderstood.2 But how could a company blow a message about identity this badly? And what does it take to get it right? Across the Atlantic Ocean, a beer company offered the answers to some of these questions.

Wearing a plaid shirt and faded blue jeans, Jeff Douglas strode onto the stage and approached the microphone. He quietly began speaking to the people in the theater, hesitantly at first. “Hey, I’m not a lumberjack or a fur trader and I don’t live in an igloo or eat blubber or own a dogsled and I don’t know Jimmy, Sally, or Susie from Canada, although I’m certain they’re really, really nice.”

He raised his voice slowly as he continued. “I have a prime minister, not a president. I speak English and French, not American, and I pronounce it ‘about,’ not ‘a boot.’” Footage showing beavers, a chesterfield, the letter Z (pronounced “zed”), and a toque (a knitted winter hat) played on a large screen behind him.

Now reaching a roar, he declared, “Canada is the second-largest landmass, the first nation in hockey, and the best part of North America,” as highlights from a classic hockey game and an image of a massive Canadian flag rolled on the screen. Then, in climax: “My name is Joe and I am Canadian.”

This speech, known affectionately as “the rant,” lasted just a minute.3 But it became the centerpiece of one of the most successful beer-advertising campaigns in Canadian history. It was part of the “I am Canadian” campaign launched in the year 2000 by Molson Breweries, the oldest brewing company in Canada. The savvy marketing team knew that Molson’s most important ingredient wasn’t the hops in their beer but the company’s identity.

The rant was a bald attempt to sell beer using nationalism, and the beer they were advertising was already named Canadian. Yet it helped articulate something that many felt was missing from the national conversation. It is fair to say that Canadians are often shy about expressing their national identity in such a bold way. But characterizing what it means to be Canadian, especially in contrast to its bigger, more powerful neighbor to the south, allowed Canadians to define who they were.

Every Canadian who wore a toque, owned a chesterfield, or pronounced the letter Z as “zed” felt a sense not only of belonging but also of distinctiveness. It was the very opposite of the Scandinavian Airlines ad, which managed to neglect the sense of belonging people desire and undercut any feelings of distinctiveness. That deflating ad was almost perfectly crafted to threaten people’s cultural identity rather than affirm it.

By combining these two psychological ingredients, belonging plus distinctiveness, the “I am Canadian” campaign resonated with Canadians. It launched a banner year for Molson Breweries, seeing the company gain 1.6 points on the stock market. This unadorned attempt to market a social identity was clearly enough to sell cases—many, many cases—of Molson Canadian beer.

But the rant did more than move beer; it moved people in a way that a beer commercial rarely does. The rant received the Gold Quill Award from the advertising industry in 2001 and was imitated and parodied across Canada. It was even included in the Penguin Treasury of Popular Canadian Poems and Songs because, as John Colombo, editor of the collection, put it, the words “express a human need to affirm an identity in the face of ignorance and indifference.”

The rant signifies the power of identity to shape the value we place on everything from products to people. People often think that their tastes are a unique part of their individuality. Indeed, they often want to be distinctive with their own idiosyncratic set of preferences. Ask your friend why she drinks a certain brand of beer and we doubt she will say it is because she identifies with the brewery.

But aspects of one’s identity have an influence on all sorts of daily decisions, often outside one’s conscious awareness. Your preferences are fundamentally shaped by your social identity, and the reason is quite simple: your social identity is you. In this chapter, we explain how different motives shape identity, focusing particularly on core human needs for belonging, distinctiveness, and status. These motives make certain identities more attractive and important and, in turn, shape how people value individuals and things in the world around them. From the foods people eat to whom they choose to date to the products they buy to the schools they attend, identity is at the heart of many of their most important decisions.





Identity Economics


We are hardly alone in the opinion that identities matter deeply for decisions. Nobel laureate George Akerlof and Rachel Kranton wrote an entire book, called Identity Economics, in which they claim that the “choice of identity…may be the most important economic decision a person ever makes.”4 Once we understand how identity influences value, we can see why some decisions that might seem irrational to some make complete sense to others.

The act of identity signaling, for instance, is often an attempt to affirm one’s membership in a group. Doing it publicly—such as on your Instagram or Facebook profile—provides an efficient way to signal to yourself and your social community who you are. And as we have emphasized throughout this book, who you are is heavily determined by the norms of the groups you care about.

This psychology is used by marketers, policy makers, and leaders to cultivate a sense of identity in people they seek to influence. When done well, cultivating the right kind of identity can lead to a deeper sense of connection and, for companies, a stronger bottom line. Understanding the dynamics of social identity has allowed some organizations to corner their markets and others to encompass the globe. We believe, for example, that Apple became one of the world’s largest companies not only through technical savvy but by creating in many consumers a deep sense of identification with its products. Like Molson Canadian, Apple built an identity that meets a psychological need for optimal distinctiveness—the feeling that you simultaneously belong and stand out from others. It’s a potent cocktail.

Psychological needs can help us understand what motivates people to identify with groups. What is it that makes some groups more attractive than others or more attractive at certain points in people’s lives? We will explore the role that belonging, distinctiveness, and status play in binding people to groups. Groups that fulfill one or more of these goals are going to be more appealing than groups that do not. When social identities scratch these motivational itches, people place more value on these groups and on the things and actions that symbolize their memberships.

This chapter will also dive more deeply into the ways that social identities provide potent incentives for cooperation. We will present evidence showing how people more readily cooperate and improve outcomes for everyone when they identify with their groups and adhere to cooperative social norms. This has critical implications for creating groups and organizations that function effectively.

If employees, for example, care only about personal outcomes like wages and bonuses, they will often find a way to game the system and exploit loopholes for personal gain. Petty theft by their own employees is estimated to cost companies tens of billions of dollars each year, an average of 1.4 percent of their revenue.5 And this does not account for losses due to absenteeism and other ways in which people seek to benefit themselves at the expense of collective goods. If employees do not identify with their organizations, they will do what it takes to benefit or protect themselves personally, not necessarily what is good for their firms. Organizations operate much more effectively when people identify with them.





Valuing Others


When the two of us arrived at The Ohio State University, it quickly became clear that the identity of the university community was centered on the college football team, the Buckeyes. At every home game, the campus was overrun with more than a hundred thousand fans dressed in scarlet and gray. Every bar was packed. TVs were placed in every restaurant in the city, and they all carried the game live (followed by countless hours of replays and analysis). It was a celebration of collective purpose unlike anything we had ever seen.

The year we arrived on campus, the team won their first twelve games and went on to play in the national championship game. It was clear to us that the Buckeyes knew something special about group success.

Nearly forty years earlier, the football team had started one of the most interesting traditions in college sports. According to legend, a member of the coaching staff had an idea to motivate the players.6 After each game, the coaches would reward the best players by giving them small stickers to place on their helmets.

The logic was simple: recognizing individual success would provide a social incentive for players to work harder to stand out. The stickers would become symbols of individual achievement, and by the end of the season, star players would stroll onto the field with their helmets covered in small Ohio Buckeye symbols, not unlike military generals decorated in medals. The Buckeyes won the national championship that year, and teams around the country copied the practice of using stickers to reward excellence.

The stickers became an institution. But by 2001, the long successful Buckeyes had returned to mediocrity. So when the team hired a new coach, Jim Tressel, he decided to mess with tradition. Rather than recognizing individual performance, Tressel changed the reward system to focus on collective success. For example, instead of giving one player a sticker for scoring a touchdown, every player on the offensive unit would get a sticker if the team scored a certain number of points. And the coaches gave every player on the team a sticker after each win.

Rewarding teamwork paid off, and the team won a national championship the next year. By encouraging the players to value collective success rather than just individual accomplishments, the coaches had managed to generate effective cooperation. By the time we arrived on campus, the Buckeyes had cemented their record as one of the most successful teams in the country.7

This helped explain the camaraderie in the locker room and on the field. But the benefits of shared identity extended far beyond the football field, creating a shared sense of purpose—and pride—among a much broader swath of people. We were not the first social psychologists at Ohio State to recognize the impact of this social identity on the fans. More than three decades before we arrived on campus, Robert Cialdini and his collaborators studied how people who were not part of the game nevertheless felt the warm glow of success after a victory.8 Fans contribute little to the success of the team beyond their moral support, but they might well “bask in reflected glory” when the team triumphs.

College football games are played on Saturdays, so the researchers monitored students at seven different universities to see who showed up wearing team-supporting apparel in class on Mondays. They counted buttons, jackets, T-shirts, sweaters, and briefcases that displayed the school logo or team nickname and found that 8 percent of students wore university apparel to class that semester. On Mondays after their home team had won a game, however, this number spiked.

Visible signals of identification with the team surged on these days as students became more likely to wear school symbols to class in a show of pride. In a subsequent study, the researchers called students after each game and asked them to describe the outcome. After victories, students were more likely to use collective pronouns to describe the event, saying “we won” as opposed to “the team won.” But the use of the word we diminished following losses. In fact, students used the term we when describing a victory nearly twice as often (26 percent) as they did when describing a loss (13.5 percent).

These findings suggest that people identified with their team more following a win than a loss. But were they simply sporting team-promoting garb to fit in with everyone else following a victory or was there more to it than that? Did they genuinely experience a ray of reflected glory?

To better grasp how identities influence the way people value the outcomes of others, we used functional neuroimaging to look inside New York University students’ brains as their in-group succeeded. In a project led by Leor Hackel, we brought students into NYU’s Center for Brain Imaging and had them play an economic game with either an in-group member (a fellow NYU student) or an out-group member (a student from Columbia University).9 In this game, they had the chance to earn real money based on their decisions.

On half the trials, we gave them a choice between an amount of money they could take for themselves (for example, a dollar) or an amount of money they could give to the other player (for example, two dollars). In this case, people most often preferred to grab the dollar for themselves, but sometimes they felt generous enough to allow the other player to walk away with the larger sum. When students confronted these types of decisions, however, it mattered a great deal whom they were playing with.

When highly identified NYU students were playing with a fellow NYU student, they were more generous than when they were playing with a Columbia student. This pattern reversed among students who were not strongly identified with NYU. If anything, these students were slightly more generous to an out-group member. In other words, people were willing to sacrifice their own money to help out an in-group member over an out-group member—but only if they identified with the in-group.

We then analyzed patterns of neural activity. To examine how people valued others’ outcomes, the study also included a number of trials in which our participants received money at no one else’s expense, as well as trials in which they observed their partner (the in-group or out-group member) receiving money at no one else’s expense. This allowed us to identify a small region of the brain, known as the right caudate, that was especially active when participants received a reward. Having identified this region, we looked to see whether it was also active when a member of the in-group, a fellow NYU student, received a reward—and it was! The same region that responded when they personally were given money responded to the sight of an in-group member experiencing this positive outcome. This did not happen, of course, when they watched an out-group member being rewarded.

This neuroscience approach gives us insight into whether people are genuinely basking in the reflected glory of in-group members when something good happens to them or if they, for example, are wearing the team jersey after a victory merely to fit in on campus. Our study suggests that something akin to genuine basking does occur; people who care about the in-group are not only willing to send fellow members more money than they send rival out-group members but also appear to have an intrinsic feeling of reward when fellow group members have a stroke of good fortune.

This underscores a virtue of identity: it is one of the reasons we care about the outcomes of others. The feelings of joy you get when a teammate succeeds, a colleague wins an award, or your country wins a medal at the Olympics are all evidence of identity-based value in operation.





Fitting In


Humans have a powerful need to belong, fit in, and connect with others. The consequences of not fitting in can be severe. Loneliness, the feeling that one lacks meaningful social connection with others, is a well-known contributor to poorer mental- and physical-health outcomes. Indeed, the sociologist Robert Putnam famously declared that if someone smokes a pack of cigarettes a day and belongs to no groups, it is a statistical toss-up as to which he or she should change. Quit smoking or join a group—either will have about the same impact on your health.10

Joining groups is good for your health because, among other things, it satisfies core human motivations. During the COVID-19 pandemic, Dom and a group of colleagues examined how social identities embedded in people’s local communities were associated with poor mental-health outcomes like stress and depression. From April to October of 2020, we observed that people who felt more connected to their communities—especially those who believed that members of their communities were rallying to support one another during the crisis—experienced less stress and depression over time.

Groups that provide a sense of belonging are often attractive to people because they satisfy this essential need. People may also find social identities more important when they are experiencing a heightened desire to belong, either chronically (some people seem to feel this need more strongly than others) or in a particular situation.

Some of our research has examined one of the consequences of this; namely, that people are more attentive to and remember fellow group members better when their need to belong is active. People often exhibit better memory for the faces of in-group compared to out-group members. For example, it is common for people to recognize faces belonging to their own racial categories more readily than faces of people of other races. This is partly why people sometimes say that members of other groups seem to look alike. To some extent, this is probably due to differences in experience. People generally spend more time, especially early in life, around others who belong to the same racial groups as themselves, and they may develop some expertise at recognizing certain types of faces.

But this is not the whole story.11 It turns out that people are better at recognizing in-group members generally, even when people in their in-group belong to different races or when an in-group and out-group are all the same race and cannot be distinguished in that way. In several experiments, we assigned people to completely novel teams (minimal-type groups) that they had never heard of before.12 After they joined their groups, we showed participants a series of faces of both in-group and out-group members before giving them a surprise memory test.

Generally speaking, people remember the in-group faces better than out-group faces, probably because they pay more attention to them when they are first encountered. The people in our own groups are often more relevant to us and so they get more of our concentration. However, this difference is larger for people who have a stronger need to belong. Hungry for social connection, they are more attuned than ever to fellow in-group members.

The need to belong may also influence how people value symbols and products attached to their identities. Researchers in the Netherlands conducted experiments in which they made people feel excluded, thus heightening their need to belong, before having them choose between different kinds of Dutch products.13 Critically, some of the products were nostalgic—from brands that were popular in the nation’s past. Other products were contemporary, popular only in the here and now. They found that people who had been excluded were more nostalgic, choosing brands of cookies, crackers, soup, candy, and cars with roots in the past more often than people who had not been made to feel excluded.

Meeting belongingness needs is often difficult. These challenges may be particularly acute for members of minority or marginalized groups who often get treated in ways that imply they do not fully belong. Although they might have been citizens of a country for many years or across multiple generations, members of visual minority groups are frequently asked, “Where do you come from?” or “What is your background?” as if their identity must reside elsewhere.

In a pair of experiments, Maya Guendelman and her colleagues studied how these sorts of identity threats influence food choices, speculating that people singled out as different due to their ethnic or cultural background might feel the need to work extra-hard to confirm their identity as Americans.14 They recruited Asian Americans (with heritage from a variety of countries in Asia), who, despite being born in the United States, are often told they don’t belong.

When the participants arrived in the lab, the experimenter—a White American—asked half of them if they spoke English. This might seem like an innocent query on the surface, but to many minority group members, it serves as a signal that their identity as an American is being questioned.

When they were asked about their food preferences, the Asian American participants who had been asked if they spoke English were three times more likely to say that their favorite foods were typical American fare—things like Big Macs and pizzas—than Asian Americans who had not been queried about their language. The same question about speaking English had no influence on White American participants, likely because it was not experienced as a threat to belonging by these majority group members.

In a subsequent experiment, participants were given access to a food-delivery website and asked to select a dish they wanted to eat. If they had been asked about speaking English, Asian Americans were more likely to order hot dogs, hamburgers, fried chicken, and Philly cheesesteaks over less typically American choices like sushi, pork banh mi, bibimbap, and chicken curry. Selecting the American food options was unhealthy, translating into choices that contained, on average, an extra 182 calories and 12 grams of fat compared to the food selected by Asian Americans who had not been asked about speaking English. However, choosing stereotypically American foods might have helped Asian Americans feel (or allowed them to demonstrate) a stronger sense of national belonging after it had been called into question.





Think Different


More than seventy-seven million people watched the 1984 Super Bowl between the Washington, DC, NFL team and the Los Angeles Raiders. The game itself has long been forgotten by everyone but the most die-hard fans, but many people still remember the striking commercial that aired during an advertising break.

In a scene from a dystopian future, row upon row of people sit transfixed as they watch Big Brother on a huge video screen. A voice drones on about the “first glorious anniversary of the Information Purification Directives.” Suddenly, out of nowhere, a blond woman comes running past the passive rows of spectators. As she reaches the front, she hurls an enormous, Thor-like hammer at the screen and smashes it to smithereens. Then a voice-over message: “On January 24, Apple Computer will introduce Macintosh. And you’ll see why 1984 won’t be like 1984.”

In a competitive field, the famous 1984 Apple commercial was named the best Super Bowl advertising spot in the game’s forty-year history, and TV Guide ranked it as the number-one commercial of all time. The ad marked the beginning of a revolutionary advertising sequence in which Apple positioned itself as the signature computer brand for rebels—for people who stand out as distinctive. Building on the theme, over a decade later, Apple launched its “Think Different” campaign featuring iconoclastic figures like Albert Einstein, Martin Luther King Jr., Amelia Earhart, and Pablo Picasso. They cemented the idea that Apple was the brand for mavericks and innovators.

These commercials might seem ironic now, when Apple is one of the most ubiquitous and valuable companies on earth. It is impossible to grab coffee or groceries without noticing that you are surrounded by people using Apple products. You could be forgiven for thinking that, far from being anti-conformists or rebels, Apple users are not that different from the drones in that famous commercial: transfixed by a screen, inattentive to the world around them.

Indeed, the two of us are as likely as anyone else to be caught staring mindlessly at our iPhones as we stroll around campus. Yet we also like to maintain the image of ourselves as rebels who flout convention. How is it that Apple managed to cultivate the sense that its users “Think Different” while also turning them into one of the largest groups of consumer conformists in history? The answer is that Apple became one of the world’s most successful and valuable brands, with a cultlike following, by creating an optimally distinct identity.

The idea of “optimal distinctiveness” was developed by one of our mentors and intellectual heroes, Marilynn Brewer.15 She understood that the most compelling groups are often those that fulfill two basic but conflicting human motives: a need to belong and a need to be distinctive. People want to belong, but part of the power of a social identity comes from what it excludes—which helps people clarify who they are and who they are not.

As Brewer put it, we seek to be the same and different at the same time.

Picture a group of punks, or goths, or hipsters. If you’re like us, you’re probably imagining a few young people dressed in much the same way as one another, adorned with similar jewelry, piercings, or tattoos, listening to the same music through the same style of headphones. If you actually ran into a group like this on the street, you might be tempted to ask, Don’t you know that you all look the same? To which they might offer the snarky reply: No way—you’re the conformist; we’re expressing our individuality! These sorts of subcultures embody optimal distinctiveness in action. Their members experience a delightful sense of distinctiveness from the rest of society while benefiting from a deep sense of belonging with their own kind. Achieving this sort of balance is one of the reasons why certain groups prove irresistible to people.

The same psychology applies to products. By purchasing certain products, you reveal to yourself—and others—who you think you are. The sort of car you drive, clothing you wear, foods you eat, and technologies you use can send signals to others. They may sometimes be signifiers of status (your level of wealth, for example), but often these choices seem to express something more about what you value and the identities you hold dear.

You might be hesitant to believe that people truly identify with a product like Apple. We were, too, so we ran a study to investigate. Dominic surveyed students at Lehigh University to learn about their most cherished identities. As one would expect, identities related to gender, race, age, and politics were common. But sure enough, a significant number of students said they were proud to be either a “Mac” or a “PC” person.

Other research has found that the appeal of optimal distinctiveness extends to charitable decisions. For instance, an analysis of over twenty-eight thousand crowdfunding campaigns found that distinctiveness was a key ingredient for success.16 Those campaigns that stood out from traditional narratives about similar types of causes were more appealing; they attracted more financial backers and raised more money. People tend to be drawn to narratives that differentiate a cause, defining how it is special.





The Appeal of Underdogs


The psychological magic of optimal distinctiveness helps us understand why music fans will brag that they liked a famous band or musician “before they were big” and why people love to cheer for the underdog. By definition, underdogs are likely to lose and might seem like a bad place to align your identity, since they will leave you crying into your beer more often than not. But we have found that people who have a heightened need for distinctiveness are more likely to identify with underdogs.

When the two of us were in graduate school, we came across a newspaper article about Microsoft claiming that it was an underdog in its battle with its Silicon Valley rivals. At the time, Microsoft was one of the largest and most powerful companies in the world, the recent target of an antitrust lawsuit from the U.S. government. It seemed strange to us that such a large and powerful company would try to claim underdog status, unless executives were doing it to increase how much their employees—and their customers—identified with their company.

To find out whether underdogs help satisfy the need for optimal distinctiveness, we designed studies in collaboration with Geoff Leonardelli, a professor at the University of Toronto’s business school. Toronto is the largest university in the country, and, as in large groups generally, students often complain that they are treated as if they are anonymous, not as distinctive individuals. In our studies, we exacerbated this feeling for some of our student participants, stating that the university saw them simply as a number, one among thousands, thereby heightening the student’s need or desire for a distinct identity.

For other students in these studies, we affirmed that they were seen as unique individuals rather than as mere numbers. Their desire for uniqueness satisfied, these participants, we hypothesized, would not need to identify with an underdog to scratch that itch.

We then had everyone read about the university’s men’s water polo team. (We selected the water polo team because hardly anyone had heard of it, which made it easy for us to shape their impressions of the team.) We told some participants that the team was entering an upcoming championship game as an underdog; we told others that the team was the clear favorite to win.

Rationally, one might think that students would especially want to cheer on their own university’s team if it was a success story and favored to win. But this was not exactly what we found. Instead, people who felt a need for distinctiveness because we, the researchers, had made them feel like mere anonymous cogs were more likely to identify with the water polo team when they were the underdog.

We found a similar pattern in a subsequent study in which we measured identification with two NBA teams—the New York Knicks and the Miami Heat—locked in a close playoff game. Again, the underdog team was more appealing to the folks whose need for a distinctive identity was heightened. The feeling seemed to spike when the underdogs pulled close at the end of the game and fans could taste victory.

This might be why sports stories about underdogs are eternally appealing. People want to achieve a level of optimal distinctiveness, and identifying with an underdog helps meet the balance between fitting in and standing apart. It changes the psychological value of a team that is otherwise a long shot. As a result (we think), Hollywood produces a near-endless stream of movies about underdogs.

From Rocky to Hoosiers to Rudy to A League of Their Own to The Mighty Ducks, the appeal of the underdog crosses sports and generations. But people want to do more than simply support underdogs or, more generally, possess optimally distinctive identities. They often want to signal these identities to the world.





Signaling Identity


Apple recognized that its customers not only bought its products—they became brand evangelists. Can you think of something that comes with every Apple product that has absolutely no practical function?

If you are an Apple enthusiast, you know that every major Apple product comes with a small white sticker depicting the famous bitten-apple logo. The sticker serves no purpose; it is not even meant to go on the product itself. The function is entirely social. You can place the Apple sticker on your bike, car window, or suitcase to signal to others at work, school, and in transit that they are in the presence of a Mac person.

Apple also built this signaling sensibility into its products. For example, the Apple logo on the lid of every laptop faces down and away from the person who owns it when the lid is closed. This might seem like a mistake, but it’s not. Once the computer is opened, the logo faces the right way up to other people across the room. It is an identity signal to others, not the self.

Economists have found that people will pay large amounts of money to signal a distinctive identity. One of the most interesting—and expensive—ways that people signal identity is through the vehicles they drive.17 Environmentalism has become an important part of some people’s identities, which has created a market for electric or hybrid cars that offer better mileage and are less harmful to the environment. For a long time, perhaps the most distinctive hybrid car was the Toyota Prius. One of the first widely produced electric cars on the market, it had a visually unique style that was easily noticed by other environmentally conscious bystanders.

Economists observed that people were willing to pay more for a Prius than for a comparable hybrid car, the Honda Civic. Both cars offered roughly the same environmental benefits in terms of mileage and emissions, but the Honda Civic did so in a more subtle fashion. The Civic is a popular model of car and had been around for years before Honda decided to make a hybrid version. There were thousands of nonhybrid but very similar-looking Honda Civics on the road, making it difficult for your coworker or neighbor to realize that you were driving a hybrid. This was in stark contrast to the visually unusual Prius, which clearly signaled your environmental credentials to everyone in your social network.

This distinctiveness added value. People were willing to spend as much as $4,200 more at the time to drive the Prius. At a purely pragmatic level, this is irrational. Surely environmentalists should care more about the actual impact of a car on the environment than on their ability to signal that impact to others. However, this is not how identity works. People want to do multiple things at the same time—live out their beliefs and values while also maximizing their belonging and their distinctiveness. Driving the more obvious hybrid car allowed them to achieve this balance. Given the relatively high price tag of these cars, it might also have helped people satisfy another psychological need—the need for status.





Status Needs


On March 12, 2019, news broke that actresses Lori Loughlin and Felicity Huffman had been arrested in a massive college-bribery scandal.18 Operation Varsity Blues alleged that thirty-three parents of college applicants had collectively paid more than twenty-five million dollars to fraudulently increase their kids’ test scores or bribe university administrators. These parents were allegedly willing to break the law to give their kids a leg up in the admissions process at prestigious universities like Stanford, Yale, Northwestern, UC Berkeley, UCLA, and USC. The case was the largest of its kind to be prosecuted by the U.S. Justice Department.

The national media covered this story because it involved bad behavior by celebrities and it exposed serious corruption within the higher-education system. But at the heart of the crime were anxious and wealthy parents seeking an edge in the hypercompetitive market for college admissions.

A good education is a key to future opportunity and earnings, and tuition—especially in the United States—is often pricey. But is it worth spending hundreds of thousands more (let alone risking a prison sentence) to buy your kid an education at a slightly more prestigious school than they might otherwise attend?

Most economists would probably say no. The benefits of college are largely accrued by lower-socioeconomic-class students, and there is little difference in the actual quality of education between the more prestigious University of Southern California and the marginally less prestigious University of California, Irvine. Motivated students are just as likely to flourish at a good state school as they are at a plush private university. This is an important point that is often overlooked in reputations and rating systems. The goal of an educational institution is presumably to educate people and improve their lives, yet rankings often include factors like how hard it is to get admitted, the financial resources of the institution, and how much money the alumni give back. Critically, these metrics have recently been changing to pay more attention to student outcomes, like graduation rates, and how well a university contributes to social mobility for less advantaged students.

But rankings matter to people, as do perceptions of relative status. This helps explain why people are willing to mortgage their houses or break the law to get their kids into a marginally more prestigious university. Higher-ranked schools provide a potent social-identity boost for both students and parents.

We are not suggesting that a prestigious university pedigree doesn’t confer real benefits. In addition to a wonderful opportunity to learn, these schools help determine job prospects and romantic and life partners. Students gain access to valuable social networks they may remain in for the rest of their lives. But many of these benefits are due as much to the identity their graduates now hold as they are to the gains in skills and knowledge that are fundamental to a university education.

In the landscape of higher education, membership in the Ivy League represents elite status. But there are differences in status even among those Ivy League universities. For instance, one survey found that while 41 percent of people realize that Harvard is an Ivy, less than 2 percent know that the University of Pennsylvania belongs to the same category.19

To outsiders, this may seem trivial, but these subtle differences in status are psychologically real to the people involved. Indeed, because their status is less well recognized, Penn students are more eager to point out their credentials to others to avoid any confusion. When Penn and Harvard students are asked to describe their university to others, Penn students are more likely to mention that they attend an Ivy League school, even in private correspondence. Harvard students don’t feel as much need to mention it; people already know they have a high-status social identity.

The same psychology of identity plays out on university websites and even professors’ e-mails. After all, professors are hardly immune from the same psychological needs as their students. One analysis found that lower-ranked universities were more likely to mention the word university on their websites than their more prestigious counterparts.20 Departments with lower rankings were also more likely to list the credentials of their faculty. And professors did the same. As a result, faculty with more publications or citations were less likely to display symbols of personal success in their e-mail signatures.

Attempts to claim and signal a high-status social identity are part of a psychological phenomenon known as symbolic self-completion.21 Most people need the acknowledgment of others to feel that they achieved a desired identity. When symbols of your success are recognized and affirmed by others, it reassures you that you have attained that identity in the eyes of your peers and of society. This is true not only for academic credentials but for any aspect of life in which people seek to excel, whether in their profession, their hobbies, or even their relationships. Why else is there such a market for WORLD’S BEST GRANDPA T-shirts and #1 MOM mugs?

We have noticed a tendency both on social media and offline for people to diminish and even make fun of identity signaling. Sometimes disparaged as “virtue signaling” or “showing off,” the implication is that displays of identity are self-promoting or disingenuous. And certainly they can be. But signaling identities is also a vital part of the way that people navigate the social world. It is how people establish standing and how fellow members of valued groups find one another.





Finding Each Other


When humans collaborate, we are capable of extraordinary things. We build cathedrals, create universities, run multinational corporations, and cohere in nation-states. We build Mars rovers and land on the moon. We become greater than the sum of our parts. There’s more to these enterprises than shared identity, of course. But identity helps people overcome hurdles to successful collaboration by making cooperation much easier.

Whenever people choose to work together, it is an act of trust. Deciding to write this book together, we trusted that each of us would uphold his end of the bargain, contributing about equally to the long hours of writing, rewriting, and more rewriting! When we signed with our agent, we trusted that he would do his utmost to find us a publisher (thanks, Jim!). And when we contracted with Little, Brown Spark, we trusted that they would do a good job editing and selling our book. They, in turn, trusted that we would write a decent book under the deadline. The fact that you are reading this book means that all these small acts of trust worked out.

There are multiple ways to decide whether you can trust someone. Establishing long relationships in which people learn about each other is one way. Legal contracts are another. And shared identities are a third. We have seen (especially in chapter 1) that when people take on a social identity, it induces a shift in motivation, and they become interested in outcomes beyond their own individual self-interest. Selfish individuals, ordinarily focused quite exclusively on their own outcomes, start to contribute as much to collective goods as pro-social people, who normally care more about other people’s outcomes.

But this shift in motivation is not sufficient to produce trust. It’s not enough that you care about fellow in-group members and would like to see them thrive. To really trust them and believe that they are likewise interested in your success, you need to believe that they are similarly motivated to do good by your common group membership. In other words, knowledge of identity needs to be shared to unlock the full potential for cooperation.

To illustrate the importance of sharing knowledge of an identity, imagine that you’re playing something known as the “trust game.” In every round of this game, you are given a sum of money—let’s say ten dollars—and have to decide how much of it to invest with a partner. The amount that you choose to invest will be sent to your partner and will be multiplied by some amount—let’s say three. So if you decide to invest the full amount and send across all ten dollars, it will multiply and your partner will receive thirty dollars. Your partner then gets to decide how much to send back to you. If that person is completely fair and sends back half of what he or she received, you will each walk away with fifteen dollars, one and a half times your original allotment, and three times what you started with collectively. Both of you do well if there is enough trust.

Now imagine that on some rounds your partner is an in-group member and on other rounds your partner belongs to an out-group. How much would you choose to invest with each type of partner? If you’re like most people, you will invest more money with an in-group than an out-group partner because you trust an in-group member more; that is, you expect that you will get more money back from that person.

But now imagine that while you know that you and your fellow in-group member share an identity, your partner is unaware of your common bond. He or she is blind to who you are! What would you do now?

Experiments that manipulate exactly this find that while people still have plenty of positive feelings toward fellow in-group members, they don’t trust them more than out-group members when their own identity is not visible.22 Knowing that an in-group member is aware that the two of you belong to the same group is the key to unlocking cooperation.

The critical importance of knowing about shared identities helps explain why people take such pains to signal their group memberships to others. Catholics wear crucifixes; liberals, conservatives, environmentalists, runners, hunters, advocates, and activists of all kinds affix bumper stickers to their cars. And people spent roughly $26.47 billion on licensed sports apparel in 2018. These and many other symbols are signs of group pride, and they play the crucial role of signaling your allegiances and identities to others.

Growing up in Canada, we were told to sew our national flag to our backpacks when we traveled abroad. As teenagers let loose in Europe (Jay in Italy, Dom in France) we met Canadian women who recognized these symbols of shared identity and were delighted to find a fellow in-group member so far from home. We had traveled to these other countries to experience new things and meet different kinds of people, but by signaling our national identity in a conspicuous way, we found and momentarily enjoyed the company of fellow in-group members among strangers.

Toshio Yamagishi, a social psychologist who initiated research on many of these issues, described social identities as “containers of generalized reciprocity.”23 What he meant was that when we share an identity with people it helps us to trust them even without knowing anything else about them. We trust that our fellow in-group members have undergone the same motivational shift that we have and are now oriented toward our collective interests.

This is how social identities allow people to establish trust with a much broader array of people than they can possibly know directly or enter into legal contracts with. It vastly expands our possibilities for connection and cooperation. Unfortunately, however, the value we place on our in-groups sometimes has a negative side. In the next chapter, we will delve into how group dynamics contribute to prejudice and discrimination—and what can be done about it.
