Leading Effectively




When we think of leaders in action, a set of simple iconic images often comes to mind.

We might think of Jacinda Ardern, the prime minister of New Zealand, reacting to an earthquake during a live television interview. Talking about her country’s highly effective response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Ardern remains cool and collected as the ground beneath her rattles and shakes. “We’re just having a bit of an earthquake here, Ryan,” she coolly tells the interviewer before assuring him that she is fine to carry on.1

We might picture Winston Churchill walking among the wreckage of demolished buildings, greeting Londoners as they sweep up rubble following a night of heavy German bombing.

We might imagine seamstress Rosa Parks quietly but firmly refusing to move to the back of a bus in racially segregated Montgomery, Alabama.

We might see Mahatma Gandhi leading a march of many thousands of Indian protesters hundreds of miles to the sea. Reaching at long last the shore, he stoops to pick up grains of salt, breaking the tax laws, which prohibit the Indian population from collecting or selling their own salt. A powerful yet nonviolent strike against a symbol of British imperial oppression.

We might also envision the famous photo of President Barack Obama, taken early in his first term, bending low in the Oval Office to let a little Black boy touch his hair. A moment earlier, Jacob Philadelphia, the five-year-old son of a staffer, had whispered, “I want to know if my hair is just like yours.” “Why don’t you touch it and see for yourself. Touch it, dude,” Obama responded as he lowered his head for Jacob to reach.2

Leadership is a deeply complex phenomenon. Despite millennia of thinking about it, researchers have yet to fully answer even the most basic of questions: What makes some leaders effective while others fail? What drives some people to seek to lead? Why do other people consent to be led? How can leadership abilities be developed? What abilities are necessary? When are leaders a force for good, when are they a force for evil, and can evil leaders be thwarted?

In his wonderful book Leading Minds, psychologist Howard Gardner provides case studies of eminent twentieth-century leaders.3 The eleven people whose lives and tactics, successes and failures he probes are a varied bunch. They range from scholarly and scientific leaders, like Margaret Mead and J. Robert Oppenheimer, through military, religious, and business leaders, to social and political leaders like Martin Luther King Jr., Margaret Thatcher, and Gandhi. Despite many striking differences between his subjects, Gardner draws out critical things they have in common. Fundamentally, he argues, what great leaders do, no matter their domain, is tell stories about identity:

What links the eleven individuals…and the score of others from this century whose names could readily have been substituted for them, is the fact that they arrived at a story that worked for them and, ultimately, for others as well. They told stories—in so many words—about themselves and their groups, about where they were coming from and where they were headed, about what was to be feared, struggled against, and dreamed about.



But Gardner makes it clear that it is not enough simply to tell stories; leaders must embody them:

Leaders…convey their stories by the kinds of lives they themselves lead and, through example, seek to inspire in their followers. The ways in which direct leaders conduct their lives—their embodiments—must be clearly perceptible by those they seek to influence.



Iconic moments of leadership, like the ones described above, are instances of embodiment. They are powerful because they capture an essence. But it is an essence not simply of the leaders themselves—their particular dynamism or brilliance or charisma—it is an essence of us, of the group as a whole. They are moments in which the actions of a leader exemplify something about who we are or perhaps who we aspire to be.

With her unflappable reaction to the earthquake, Jacinda Ardern carried forward the calm, collected, and collectively oriented style with which New Zealand had confronted a terrible terror attack in Christchurch in 2019 and then the COVID-19 pandemic.

Churchill striding amid the rubble signified British courage and resilience as the Brits—at the time, more or less alone—confronted Hitler’s Germany.

Dignified and humble, Rosa Parks’s simple act of refusal, for which she was arrested and charged with violating Alabama’s segregation laws, started something that could not be stopped and became a powerful symbol of nonviolent resistance to racial injustice. At a rally a few days later, following the first organized boycott of buses in Montgomery, twenty-six-year-old Martin Luther King Jr. spoke. “Nobody,” he said of Rosa Parks, “can doubt the boundless reach of her integrity. Nobody can doubt the height of her character.…And just because she refused to get up, she was arrested. And you know, my friends, there comes a time when people get tired of being trampled over by the iron feet of oppression.”4 This was King’s first political speech and a turning point in the struggle for civil rights and for the country.

Bending down to let a five-year-old boy touch his hair in the Oval Office, President Obama embodied the continuation of that struggle. Until then, Black children in America had never seen someone who looked like themselves in such high office. It was a moment in American history made possible by the accomplishments of the civil rights movement, when the very existence of a Black president afforded hope for continued progress toward a more just and equitable society.

Obama also embodied a certain American cool. “Touch it, dude.”

Of all these leaders, Gandhi probably took the greatest care to ensure that he visibly embodied his story about Indian independence and nonviolent struggle. He took to wearing a loincloth of simple spun fabric, dramatizing his connection to the poor and initiating a movement to boycott the British-controlled fabric industry by encouraging Indians to spin their own. The spinning wheel became a symbol of the independence movement. So too did salt.

These snapshots are evocative because they show a leader embodying an identity, when the story he or she sought to tell about the group’s identity was captured in a moment of authentic action.

Of course, for many of these examples, we know what happened next. We can see that a leader who unites the group around an identity today may fail to do so tomorrow. We can see that no leader’s story tells the entire truth about a group. We can also see that no story goes uncontested. There are always competing visions about where we come from and where we are going, what we must fear, struggle against, and dream about. For this reason, leadership can be understood, in many ways, as a battle of stories.





What Is Leadership?


Management guru and professor Henry Mintzberg points out that actually running a group involves a host of different tasks.5 Sometimes you are a spokesperson, talking up the team to outside constituencies. Sometimes you are a monitor, scanning the environment for opportunities and threats to the group. Sometimes you are an entrepreneur, developing strategy in response to those opportunities and threats. Sometimes (perhaps too often) you are a disturbance handler, reacting to crises within and without, taking care of HR and PR problems alike. And at other times, you are a resource allocator and a negotiator, deciding who gets what or trying to work out mutually acceptable sets of outcomes.

So what is leadership? There are nearly as many definitions of the word as there are people who have written about it. But most scholars are willing to settle for Howard Gardner’s definition: leadership is “the capacity of a person (or group of persons) to influence other people.” President Harry Truman expressed much the same idea in more cynical terms. A leader is a person, he said, “who can persuade people to do what they don’t want to do and like it.”6

These broad definitions highlight the fact that leaders are as likely to be found on the local soccer field as they are in corporate boardrooms or political offices. Leaders need not hold a formal or high-level position. Indeed, in business, the greatest influence can come from a union steward or a rogue middle manager rather than the C-suite. On the soccer pitch, it can come from the midfielder rather than the coach.

For the past couple of decades, a large body of research has examined “transformational leadership.” Transformational leaders exhibit a cluster of desirable characteristics.7 They are ethical and committed to the well-being of their organizations, serving as models of integrity. They encourage people to establish ambitious goals and inspire them to do their best. They trust people to think critically and for themselves. And they support people emotionally as well as practically. Unsurprisingly, people enjoy having transformational leaders, and this style is associated with good performance among individual workers, teams, and organizations.

No one could doubt that transformational leadership is a good thing. However, when researchers Frank Wang and Jane Howell looked at studies on transformational leadership in the workplace, they noticed that they tended to conflate two types of behaviors.8 Some aspects of transformational leadership focus on how leaders treat followers as individuals, showing concern about their professional development and career progression, for example. These are the sorts of things that make for a good boss, the sense that this is a person who knows who you are, recognizes your accomplishments, and cares about your aspirations. Other aspects of transformational leadership, however, focus on group-oriented activities, such as sharing a vision for a team and building solidarity around a common sense of purpose.

They reasoned that these different types of behaviors might foster two different kinds of identity. Individually oriented leadership might create relational identities in which individuals feel a personalized bond with a leader—feeling cared for and also caring about their leader. Group-oriented leadership activities, however, might create a strong social identity—feelings of solidarity and a shared sense of purpose for the group as a whole.

Studying a large Canadian company, Wang and Howell found that employees with more individually focused managers, the type who communicated high expectations and developed their skills, felt more personally identified with their leaders. These feelings of identification with the leader predicted better individual performance on the job and feelings of empowerment.

But employees who had more group-focused managers, the type who communicated a vision and spent time building collective camaraderie, felt more identified with their work teams. These teams also showed higher levels of performance as a group and felt more effective. Importantly, stronger team-based social identities were associated with better performance by individual team members as well.

Effective leaders engage in both individual and collective forms of transformational leadership. Both are things people want to see in managers and supervisors, not to mention coaches and mentors. There are myriad books and articles about leadership that focus on building strong relationships, providing effective feedback, developing strategies, allocating resources, and handling HR issues. Our approach is different—we will focus on the ways leaders influence others by managing their social identities.

Leaders often seek to influence their followers’ feelings of identification and the content of their social identities; that is, their conceptions of “who we are.” But ultimately, whether or not the identity stories told by leaders are embraced lies in the hands of the followers.





Leaders’ Stories


Mary Robinson was elected the first female president of Ireland in 1990. The election of a woman was a sudden, startling change for the nation, caused at least in part by the self-destruction of her opposition. When Robinson became head of state, birth control was still illegal in Ireland, married women were barred from holding certain government jobs, and the gender wage gap was about two to one in favor of men.

President from 1990 to 1997, Robinson played a significant part in liberalizing Ireland. She also fundamentally altered relations with England, being the first Irish president to meet with a British monarch, Queen Elizabeth II. Throughout her time as president and afterward, serving as UN high commissioner for Human Rights, she achieved tremendous popularity in Ireland. In 2019 on the occasion of her seventy-fifth birthday, Irish Central dubbed her “the most consequential Irish woman of the 20th century.”9

When Mary Robinson was inaugurated as president on December 3, 1990, she gave a speech in which she told a story of the Irish nation.10 It was a story about where Ireland was coming from and where the Irish people were headed, and it situated her own leadership as embodying their journey from a restrictive and insular past to a tolerant and vibrant future.

The Ireland I will be representing is a new Ireland, open, tolerant, inclusive. Many of you who voted for me did so without sharing all of my views. This, I believe, is a significant signal of change, a sign, however modest, that we have already passed the threshold to a new pluralist Ireland.



Like all leaders, Robinson made use of boundaries to define her group. But she did so in a radically inclusive way, casting a net much wider than just the nation-state to bring the “vast community of Irish emigrants” around the world—wherever they might be—into the identity.

She further expanded her nation’s story to include an ambitious vision for the role Ireland would play on the world stage. The Berlin Wall had fallen just one year earlier and she noted that she was taking office “at a vital moment in Europe’s history.” Might not Ireland, with its commitment to human rights, tolerance, and inclusivity, have a critical role to play in the reshaping of Europe under her leadership?

May I have the fortune to preside over an Ireland at a time of exciting transformation when we enter a new Europe where old wounds can be healed, a time when, in the words of Seamus Heaney, “hope and history rhyme.” May it be a Presidency where I the President can sing to you, citizens of Ireland, the joyous refrain of the fourteenth-century Irish poet as recalled by W. B. Yeats: “I am of Ireland…come dance with me in Ireland.”



Robinson understood that the language that leaders use, whether spoken, written, or tweeted, is a vital tool for crafting a shared identity.

When we hear or read powerful speeches, we tend to focus on the well-turned phrase, the apt metaphor, the beautiful, even poetic rhythms. These features demark great oratory. But more subtle linguistic cues matter too, in particular the use of words that signal solidarity.

Researchers Viviane Seyranian and Michelle Bligh coded speeches from every twentieth-century American president, from Teddy Roosevelt through George W. Bush, for the use of inclusive language.11 They were on the lookout for words and phrases that invoked collective identities as well as similarity between leader and followers.

First, though, they asked ten political scientists to determine which of the seventeen presidents had been “charismatic leaders.” Charismatic leaders, as the researchers put it, “institute social change and change the status quo in some fundamental way…by presenting people with a powerful vision that inspires and motivates them.” Only five presidents were deemed charismatic by these criteria: both Roosevelts, John F. Kennedy, Ronald Reagan, and Bill Clinton.

When the researchers examined the presidents’ speeches, they found that these five used significantly more inclusive language than the other twelve. This was true throughout their terms in office, although the charismatic presidents were especially likely to use language invoking similarity to their followers earlier on in their tenures. It may have been most important to establish themselves as embodying the group while their presidencies were still young, much as Mary Robinson did in her inaugural address.

Research suggests that the language of identity may be a winning strategy. In 2013, researchers analyzed the campaign speeches of every winner and loser who had sought to become Australia’s prime minister since 1901. Victors in these elections used collective pronouns (“we” and “us”), as opposed to individual pronouns (“I” and “me”), significantly more often than the candidates who lost.12 On average, politicians who won these races said “we” or “us” once every 79 words in their speeches, compared to once every 136 words for the runners-up—nearly twice as frequently.

Leaders use language to crystallize this shared sense of purpose, and leaders we think of as iconic are also alive to the power of a moment to signify the social identity they hope to bring to life through their followers. Around the same time that Mary Robinson was articulating a new vision for the Irish identity, a leader on another continent and in very different circumstances harnessed the same principles of identity leadership to help lift his country out of an incredibly dark period of history.





Identity Symbols


As South Africa’s apartheid regime began to disintegrate in the early 1990s, the country was isolated and in crisis. Sanctions imposed by other nations to protest the regime’s brutal racist policies had decimated the economy. Alliances of convenience with Western countries against the Soviets had dissolved with the end of the Cold War. Political violence—protest and repression both—threatened to destabilize the nation. A descent into civil war was entirely possible.

Into this nerve-racking environment, where any false move might lead to mass violence, Nelson Mandela emerged. Mandela had spent twenty-six years in prison for his opposition to the apartheid regime, confined for stretches to a cell less than fifty square feet on the notorious Robben Island. Mandela had lost a great deal. He had missed watching his children grow up. And when his mother and eldest son died a year apart, he was not allowed to attend either of their funerals.

To Black South Africans and supporters of his party, the African National Congress, Mandela was a heroic figure. But to many White South Africans, he was a criminal and a terrorist. They felt great unease—even fear—when Mandela was released from prison in 1990, and they felt it again in 1994 when, following the opening of free elections, Mandela was voted in as president of South Africa. What would he and the African National Congress do now that they had swept to power and were suddenly in control?

Nelson Mandela was, fortunately, not a man inclined to exact revenge on his oppressors. He was a leader who understood the power of identity symbols to not only divide people, as they had done for generations in his country, but also bring them together.

The year after Mandela’s election, South Africa hosted the Rugby World Cup. During the apartheid era, South Africa had been banned from competition, so this was a symbolic event. But Mandela recognized that it could be more meaningful still. The South African team, the Springboks—then a Whites-only team—were beloved by White South Africans and widely despised by the Black population, who would often cheer for the opposing side on principle.

So when the Springboks competed for—and eventually won—the Rugby World Cup on their home turf, Mandela seized the moment. In a gesture immortalized in the film Invictus, he stepped out to the podium not just as president of the country but also as a fan—wearing the distinctive green Springbok cap and jersey.

To Black and White South Africans alike, Mandela’s action was a simple but profound statement: We are one team and we are one country. In this moment, Mandela was able to co-opt a symbol of colonial oppression and use it to bring his country a bit closer together.

Of course, not all leaders draw the boundaries as inclusively as Mary Robinson and Nelson Mandela did. Some leaders seek to mobilize narrower coalitions, using stark “us” versus “them” distinctions to create more exclusionary social identities. Leaders may try to strengthen internal cohesion by drawing attention to intergroup competition and perceived threats from the outside. We see this dynamic, of course, in polarized political systems and authoritarian regimes. But it is nothing new and we will discuss its dangers at the end of this chapter when we talk about leadership gone bad.

As inspiring as figures like Mandela and Robinson are, there is a danger of focusing too much on stories, words, and symbols, on grand rhetorical gestures. Howard Gardner’s idea of embodiment reminds us that leaders’ actions matter as much as their words. The identity stories they tell, the way they use language, invoke symbols, and frame boundaries, are unlikely to rally followers to their cause if they are inconsistent with these leaders’ own choices.





Words into Action


A cowardly leader cannot instill courage. A selfish leader will not inspire generosity. And leaders who do not invest resources or support vaunted initiatives with concrete action will ultimately fail.

More generally, effective leaders are highly attentive to creating the conditions, structures, and institutions needed to make their identity stories real. Nelson Mandela didn’t just put on the green Springboks jersey and call it a day. South African leaders approached the long and arduous process of healing and unifying their country in a deep and deliberative way. Recognizing that the past doesn’t remain in the past unless it is confronted, they established mechanisms like the Truth and Reconciliation Commission to grapple with the nation’s horrific history of apartheid and thus help to secure a more hopeful future. Rosa Parks and her compatriots in the civil rights movement organized, organized, organized, and organized some more. In addition to being prime minister during World War II, Churchill took the title of minister of defense. From this position, he oversaw nearly every element of the war effort, from naval strategy and weapons development to food rationing and press coverage. More recently, Jacinda Ardern and her government took over every logistical element involved in keeping COVID-19 under control in New Zealand.

The principle of aligning conditions, structures, and processes with the group’s identity applies equally in organizations and companies. Many companies are eager to increase diversity and create more inclusive and equitable cultures. But hosting some workshops and posting an expression of values online is not enough. To make serious headway, leaders must use the full range of the managerial tools at their disposal to make this story of “who we are becoming” concrete and put the weight of action behind the vision. Allocate adequate resources to equity initiatives, which means not just hiring a diversity, equity, and inclusion officer but providing that person with a significant budget and decision-making authority. Audit and change processes that might be introducing bias. Monitor the environment for progress toward and setbacks from these goals. Request regular updates on who is being hired and, perhaps more important, who is being retained. Look out for warning signs that members of underrepresented groups are not thriving in your organization, and do so visibly. Insist on finding and rooting out underlying and systemic contributors to these problems.

All of these are ways that leaders embody, in the day-to-day moments of doing their jobs, the identities that they are striving to create. Another way leaders exemplify and reinforce these identities is in their response when the group’s sense of shared reality—perhaps its very definition—is threatened.





Responding to Threats


Although it is rarely noted as such, one of the most iconic moments of leadership studied by social psychologists occurred in the early-morning hours of December 21, 1954, when Dorothy Martin rallied the sagging spirits of her doomsday cult. We heard their story in chapter 3.13 This group of believers had expected to be rescued from Earth by alien spacecraft at the stroke of midnight. They were devastated when the moment came and went without an alien in sight.

But shortly thereafter Ms. Martin received an interstellar message that their little group, sitting all night long, had spread so much light that the world had been saved. Their shared reality was rescued from the brink: We are not crazy; we are wise and good. We are heroes, even.

Protecting and bolstering their groups’ shared conceptions of themselves is something that leaders are called on to do on a regular basis. In particular, leaders respond creatively when events, internal or external, threaten the group’s identity.14

One such threat shook American business schools in 1988 when, for the very first time, Business Week began to rank management programs.15 The magazine used a scale with two key metrics: recent MBA graduates’ satisfaction with their programs and the satisfaction that corporate recruiters had in those graduates. Suddenly the complex array of business-school identities—containing rich conceptions of who the institutions were and their sense of self-worth—was collapsed into a single dimension. Their value was reduced to a stark and solitary number.

Prior to this, every school could take pride in what it saw as its unique strengths. Perhaps they saw themselves as incubators of national leaders or research-intensive programs or regional powerhouses. By differentiating and highlighting what made it unique, every school could conceive of itself as among the very best. In the words of John Byrne, the man who created the rankings: “For years and years there were probably 50 business schools that claimed they were in the top 20 and probably hundreds that claimed they were in the top 40.…The Business Week survey eliminated the ability of some schools to claim they were in a top group.”16

The new rankings produced dismay among business-school leaders, particularly those who saw their positive beliefs about their schools reduced to an unflattering number. Organizational psychologists Kim Elsbach and Roderick Kramer took advantage of this sudden new identity threat to examine how leaders of these institutions responded.

The researchers analyzed documents, such as press releases and articles in student newspapers, and interviewed deans and public relations professionals. Said one: “It was a travesty.” Said another: “I wouldn’t be dean of this institution for very long if I did nothing to respond to even the perception that our school was slipping in its national standing.”

In response, business-school leaders challenged the very notion that their organizations could legitimately be compared en masse without attention to more specific categories. As one put it, “Business Week is throwing the Fords and the Chevys and the Porsches in the same mix. It’s not really fair. It’s like judging apples and oranges, and we’re not the same type of school as many others.” Further, if there had to be rankings, they suggested more appropriate comparisons. Not coincidentally, these tended to be ones that cast their own schools in a positive light.

Perhaps more important, however, business-school leaders took advantage of the threat to reinforce their followers’ shared conceptions of who they were. They doubled down on their internally shared realities. An administrator at the University of California, Berkeley, for example, said: “We really value our entrepreneurial culture around here. It’s central to how we see ourselves. If the Haas [Business School] emphasis on high tech and entrepreneurship was to change, the school would lose its identity and competitive advantage.” In other words: We will not let others define us; we are not generic; we are not like everyone else, and we must maintain our distinctive identity.

To this point, we have discussed how leaders can make use of the tools of social identity to build solidarity and animate their groups. But does it work? Not all leaders are equally inspiring to their followers, and, ultimately, it is followers’ reactions that determine a leader’s success. Followers evaluate leaders through the lenses of their social identities and follow these leaders, at least with enthusiasm, only if they trust them.





The Essence of Leadership


As we have seen, one of the key consequences of shared identities is that they encourage people to trust one another. The sense that you can safely rely on someone else is especially important when the outcome, perhaps even your fate, lies in another person’s hands. For this reason, people tend to be particularly concerned about the trustworthiness of their leaders, who control the futures of their teams, organizations, and nations.17

Trust in leaders matters beyond the trust that people who share an identity have in each other. Kurt Dirks, a scientist at Simon Fraser University, convinced the head coaches of thirty men’s NCAA basketball teams to let him survey their players before the start of the conference season.18 Three hundred and thirty players rated how much they trusted their coach, among other things.

Dirks tracked each team’s performance and found that teams whose players agreed that “most members of the team trust and respect the coach” and “the coach approaches his job with professionalism and dedication” performed better. Indeed, teams’ trust in their coaches at the beginning of the season predicted winning a greater proportion of games during the season and it did so even when controlling for a host of other variables in the analysis, including players’ trust in each other, the overall level of talent on the team, coaches’ prior records of performance, and how the team itself had performed in the past.

Something one of the players said is illuminating: “Once we developed trust in [our coach], the progress we made increased tremendously because we were no longer asking questions or were apprehensive. Instead, we were buying in and believe that if we worked our hardest, we were going to get there.”19

In other words, trusting their leaders allows groups to capitalize on the benefits of having a leader in the first place. There is someone to set the direction and make key decisions so the rest of the team can buckle down and do their jobs. It is not a shock, therefore, that research in the workplace shows that trust in leaders is associated with a number of good things, including better job performance, more altruism, higher satisfaction and commitment, and lower turnover.

Unsurprisingly, in the NCAA basketball analysis, teams that had performed better in the past also won more games during the season under investigation. What is perhaps more surprising was that this relationship seemed, statistically speaking, to run through trust in the coach. Doing well in the past was associated with doing well in the future in part because it increased how much people trusted the leader in the present. Great leadership produces a virtuous cycle: trustworthy leaders promote success, we trust leaders who have helped us be successful, and that trust helps generate future success.

Believing that our leaders are doing good things for us, like helping us win, is one key reason we trust them. Research suggests that another important factor is how “prototypic” they are—or how much they appear to be one of us.20 When people identify with a group, they perceive key characteristics of the group to be self-defining. If a core component of your group’s identity involves being conscientious or competitive or curious, you will tend to see yourself that way. So, too, will you adjust your behavior to align with group norms. But of course, within any group there is variation between people in terms of how well they exemplify core-defining traits and norms.

It turns out that groups are often especially attuned to how well their leaders “fit” their social identities. Psychologists are careful to refer to this fit as prototypicality rather than typicality because the most trusted and influential leaders are not the most average of group members and they are not just trying to fit in. Instead, they are among those who best capture the essence of who the group members think they are, or who they want to be. Indeed, leaders often achieve this in an exaggerated fashion by being more like “one of us” than the rest of the group: a living, breathing encapsulation of the group’s social identity.

A superficial version of this occurs when politicians try to secure photo ops of themselves eating down-to-earth and local cuisine—a hot dog, cheesesteak, or pizza—during election campaigns. Done well, however, the fit between leader and group is authentic. The genuine sense that our leader understands us, can speak for us, and will make choices that reflect our best interests gives followers the confidence to be led.

Unfortunately, there can be a major downside to using fit to decide who should be trusted as a leader. Too strong a focus on matching a particular prototype may limit the leadership opportunities that are afforded to people who do not appear similar to the majority or to traditional conceptions of the group. In industries historically dominated by White males, for example, women and members of underrepresented racial or ethnic groups may be perceived as less worthy of promotion or as performing less well as leaders.21

Research also suggests that when people feel uncertain, they tend to prefer prototypic leaders. One exception to this can occur when groups experience a crisis that causes them to think that they need a different sort of person in charge. In this situation, they might conclude that it is time for a change.22 In moments of poor corporate performance, for example, organizations may decide to replace their male CEOs with female leaders. This sounds like it could be a good thing. But Michelle Ryan and her colleagues have found that very often, it is far from positive.23 In many cases, those non-prototypical leaders are being set up for failure.

Their work demonstrates a “glass cliff” effect in which women and other underrepresented leaders are indeed more likely to be promoted in times of poor performance and organizational crisis. In their words, “this is not because [women] are expected to improve the situation, but because they are seen to be good people managers and can take the blame for organizational failure.” As a result, female leaders are disproportionately set up to take the fall for bad situations they did not create and that they may struggle to fix, as would any leader in the same circumstances. And, of course, if they do fail, it perpetuates old stereotypes that men are better leaders than women.

To get past this, conceptions of what it means to be “one of us” need to broaden. Thankfully, groups’ notions of what is “good for us” are not fixed. They can decide that bringing a diversity of experiences, backgrounds, and knowledge to leadership is important. They can decide that they want their groups to grow and evolve in their vision and membership.

Finally, in addition to trusting leaders who do good things for us and who appear to be one of us, we trust leaders who play fair. Leaders often have to make tough decisions, decisions with real consequences for the lives of their followers. They decide which basketball players to keep on the bench. They decide who gets a promotion and who does not. They may have to lay people off. They might even decide to go to war.

The concept of procedural justice recognizes that there is a difference between the way leaders make decisions and the actual decisions they make—and followers care a lot about both of these things.24 Making decisions in a procedurally just way is key to securing and maintaining trust. Even when people do not like a decision, it is more palatable if it is made in a way that they see as fair. They are more willing to accept outcomes contrary to their interests, such as not getting a promotion or a job, as long as they think the process was fair.

People perceive decision-making as fair when it appears to be neutral, when the leader seems to have no ulterior motive, and when they are given courtesy and respect. The way people are treated when decisions are made sends a message about how their leaders view them and about their standing in the group. Being treated rudely and subjected to biased or arbitrary processes signals that clearly you do not matter. Being treated politely with careful and unbiased procedures shows that you are valued, even if it did not turn out the way you had hoped. Unsurprisingly, the people with the strongest social identities, the ones who are most invested in the group and their standing within it, tend to care the most about being treated fairly.

A great deal of leadership, then, involves followers’ social identities, which can be harnessed to influence how they think, feel, and act. But leaders can be heavily influenced by social identities too—the social identity of their group as well as how they understand themselves as members of a category of leaders.





Leaders’ Own Identities


Social identities shape perceptions and what people pay attention to. Identities motivate members to protect certain conceptions of their group and maintain shared realities. People can, at times, enter identity-affirming echo chambers that blind them to alternate perspectives. As deeply invested, often highly prototypic group members themselves, leaders are affected by all of these processes as well.25 For example, a group’s sense of its shared reality can influence how its leaders monitor their environments, affecting what opportunities they see as well as which threats they perceive.

In 1970, Intel became the first company to produce commercially available dynamic random-access memory (known as DRAM). This new technology was a huge improvement on the magnetic forms of memory that computers had previously used. DRAM technology launched Intel as a major player in the computing industry, and for a time DRAM was the core of its business. But by the early 1980s, Intel had come under heavy competition from Japanese tech companies, which steadily eroded Intel’s share of the market. In an analysis examining how organizations respond to strategic challenges, Robert Burgelman and former Intel CEO Andrew Grove found that executives were slow to recognize and react to their changing competitive environment, and they attributed much of this slowness to social identity.26

“Top managers,” they wrote, “usually rise through the ranks and are deeply influenced by their perception of what made the company successful. Intel’s exit from the DRAM business, for instance, was delayed by the fact that top management was still holding on to Intel’s identity as a memory company.” It was not until Intel leaders realized that the company had become a microprocessor rather a memory company that they left the now unprofitable DRAM-manufacturing business behind.

In addition to identifying with the groups they lead, leaders may also possess a social identity of themselves as leaders—that is, as part of a category of people who influence others. They may cast this identity narrowly: self as CEO, self as vice president, self as prime minister. Or they may see it broadly: self as belonging to a band of leaders throughout history.

The ways that leaders understand this social identity—what it means to be a leader—can have a profound influence. Reflecting across his case studies of twentieth-century leaders, Howard Gardner noted an additional regularity. From an early age, many of these leaders seem to have perceived themselves as rightfully belonging to this category, as deserving a place within it. Indeed, Gardner identifies this characteristic as part of the leader identity prototype, describing what he terms the “exemplary leader,” or “E.L.”:

E.L. stands out in that she identifies with and feels herself to be a peer of an individual in a position of authority.… E.L. has pondered the issue involved in a specific position of leadership and believes that her own insights are at least as well motivated and perhaps more likely to be effective than those of the person currently at the helm.



At the age of sixteen, while talking about his future with a schoolmate, Winston Churchill said, “This country will be subject somehow to a tremendous invasion, but I tell you, I shall be in command of the defenses of London and I shall save London and England from disaster.”27

“Will you be a General then?” asked his friend.

“I don’t know,” replied Churchill. “Dreams of the future are blurred, but the main objective is clear. I repeat—London will be in danger and in the high position I shall occupy, it will fall to me to save the Capital and the Empire.”

Spoken in 1891, this was an extraordinarily cocky but also astonishingly prescient vision of events that would occur nearly fifty years later. But this sense of identity, even destiny, as a leader does not produce complacency among those who go on to embody it. Rather, people who embrace a sense of self as leader may be especially motivated to situate themselves centrally within this category to which they desire to belong.

In his recent biography of Churchill, Andrew Roberts describes how Churchill laid out a strategic route for himself to acquire political power and how he worked at it from his teenage years onward.28 While serving as a soldier in India, for example, Churchill brought with him and read cover to cover recent records of the British House of Commons. Preparing for the political career he anticipated, he went so far as to write his own speeches detailing what he would have said had he been in the House of Commons at the time. True to form, he pasted these hypothetical speeches into the records!

A person’s sense of his or her identity as a leader may inspire great ambition and success. But too fixed an identity can also be a limitation and potential source of failure. In a case study of President Lyndon Johnson, psychologist Roderick Kramer argues that Johnson’s sense of what it meant to be a great president ultimately undermined his success in that position.29

Johnson undoubtedly wanted to excel and be, as he put it, “the greatest father the country ever had.” And of all the U.S. presidents of the twentieth century, he was probably the most prepared in terms of skills and knowledge to achieve greatness. By the time he was sworn in after the assassination of John F. Kennedy, he had accumulated vast legislative and political experience, culminating in positions as Senate majority leader and vice president. And yet, Johnson stumbled badly over the Vietnam War. Vietnam was a conflict he inherited and did not want, yet he failed to prevent the war from escalating even as it detracted from his other priorities and made him less and less popular.

Kramer contends that “in Johnson’s eyes presidential greatness had two cornerstones: a record of historic domestic achievement and the ability of a president to keep the nation out of harm’s way.… [Thus] achieving greatness…required waging a successful war.” It was this latter conception of presidential identity that locked Lyndon Johnson into increasing investment in a war that he knew to be a quagmire. “The thought of ‘cutting and running,’” as Johnson once put it, “was anathema to someone who had such a keenly developed sense of what great, activist presidents need to do in moments of crisis and challenge.”





The Good, the Ugly, and the Bad


Lyndon Johnson may have been too caught up in his concept of what it meant to be a great president, but leaders can struggle and fail for many reasons. We do not offer a comprehensive account of leaders’ shortcomings, but thinking about how leaders can harness social identities highlights several ways they can go astray.

Perhaps most common, people in leadership positions may simply neglect social identity altogether, failing to capitalize on its potential to build solidarity, grow trust, and mobilize people around a common purpose. In our experience, even people who are praised as good leaders often focus much more on the individual-enhancing side of transformational leadership than the group-enhancing side. These are bosses who carefully develop and appropriately recognize their followers as individuals but fail to articulate a compelling collective vision or help the group members work well together. They tend to run their teams by maintaining strong one-to-one relationships with followers without doing much to help them see themselves as a whole, greater than the sum of its parts.

These leaders miss an opportunity. But these leaders are, of course, vastly preferable to leaders who are actively destructive of social identity and, indeed, of interpersonal relationships. One leadership style of this type has been described as “petty tyranny.”30 Tyranny because these people exploit their power at the expense of others, and petty because it’s unnecessary and often over trivial things. Most of us have had the misfortune to encounter at least one person like this.

In a meta-analysis on the effects of destructive leadership in the workplace, Birgit Schyns and Jan Schilling found that employees felt negatively toward hostile and obstructive supervisors and were likely to resist following them.31 Importantly, they also found that employees whose leaders were rated as destructive felt more negatively toward their organizations as a whole and engaged in more “counterproductive work behavior.” Counterproductive work behavior is a polite way of describing actions that range from slacking off to outright fraud and theft. These findings suggest that badly behaved bosses not only poison their own relationships with followers, they damage identification with the whole group as well.

Well-intentioned leaders who do not take social identity seriously enough are the good (but not great). Tyrannical and destructive leaders are the ugly, people who are definitely not well intentioned and who are apt to create a hot mess wherever they go. But there is a third and much more dangerous species of leader: those who know how to harness social identities, who are good at building solidarity and cohesion among their followers, and who do so for corrupt, unethical, or immoral purposes. For, as we have seen, social identities can be a force for good or a force for evil. In the hands of the wrong people, powerful identity stories can lead groups badly astray.





Tyranny and Resistance


One by one, the nine young men were rounded up. Palo Alto police officers arrested them at their homes and charged them with armed robbery and burglary. This marked the beginning of another of the most famous experiments in the history of psychology.32

In the summer of 1971, eighteen healthy young men responded to an advertisement calling for volunteers for a “psychological study of prison life.” It paid fifteen dollars a day for one to two weeks in late August and was designed to simulate the experience of living and working in a prison. The men were randomly assigned, by the flip of a coin, to play the role of either prisoner or guard.

The charismatic young psychologist Philip Zimbardo and his research assistants built a realistic mock prison, complete with cells and shackles, in the basement of Stanford University’s psychology department. Picked up by the police, a flourish designed to add realism, the prisoners were transported to this jail. They were met there by the guards, who fingerprinted them, strip-searched them, and provided them with new identities in the form of ID numbers.

According to the legend presented in most textbooks, “the guards were given no specific training on how to be guards.” They were provided with dark glasses and billy clubs and let loose while the experimenters watched to see what would happen. Famously, over the next few days, the guards began to treat the prisoners with increasing disrespect and aggression. This triggered a brief uprising by the prisoners, after which the guards cracked down with escalating brutality. Misbehaving prisoners were placed in “the Hole,” a four-foot-square closet the guards repurposed for solitary confinement. Others were subjected to humiliation as well as physical and sexual harassment. The guards grew more savage, the prisoners more submissive.

Things became so toxic that Zimbardo shut down the experiment after only six days.

Based on this version of events, the conclusion is obvious: People are powerfully affected, perhaps automatically, by the roles they are given. Provide someone with a uniform and dark glasses and call him or her a guard, and the brutal treatment of prisoners is almost an inevitability.

This idea—that roles have near inescapable consequences—has spread far and wide.33 It has been taught to millions of students around the world; it has been argued in court cases, depicted in popular films, described in bestselling books, and presented to Congress. The idea that people naturally conform to their social roles and that this can cause malfeasance or cruelty is often invoked when people in positions of authority misbehave.

But this idea that roles or identities have inevitable effects on behavior should, by now, sound problematic to you. How people behave when they take on an identity is influenced by group norms and by leadership. Indeed, leaders are fundamentally involved in establishing, promoting, and enforcing particular types of norms.

Half a century after the Stanford Prison Experiment, we have new information that puts the study in an entirely different light.34 Recently, Jay got involved in research with Stephen Reicher and Alex Haslam, analyzing the release of new tapes and documents from Stanford University’s archives. It turns out that the participants in the famous study were not simply let loose without guidance. Quite the contrary. Our analysis has instead revealed the striking role that identity leadership played in how the experiment turned out.

Such leadership began shortly after the prisoners arrived. Dr. Zimbardo himself served as the prison superintendent, and his research assistants were appointed as prison wardens. When the experiment began, the superintendent gave clear instructions to his guard followers:

You can create in the prisoners feelings of boredom, a sense of fear to some degree, you can create a notion of arbitrariness that their life is totally controlled by us.…They’ll have no freedom of action, they can do nothing, say nothing we don’t permit.



In the archives, we discovered and analyzed a fascinating audio recording of a conversation between an experimenter known as Warden Jaffe and one of the guard participants.35 Despite the popular notion that the guards spontaneously became brutal toward the prisoners, this was not the case. This particular guard was reluctant to embrace his assigned role and behave as aggressively as the researchers leading the study wanted him to.

Warden Jaffe calls the guard to task: “We really want to get you active and involved because the guards have to know that every guard is going to be what we call a tough guard and so far…” The guard replies, “I’m not too tough.” “Yeah,” says the warden, “well, you have to try to kind of get it in you.”

In their conversation (of which this exchange is just a short snippet), the warden encouraged the guard to see himself as sharing the same goals and values as the experimenters. This strategy involved situating the experiment within a broader moral and worthy purpose. He explained that the experiment was designed to provide information that would improve the correctional system out in the real world. Their research was intended, he said, to make real prisons more humane by exposing their brutality. This was a virtuous mission!

Most striking, at least to us, were the ways in which the warden employed the tools of identity leadership to encourage the reluctant guard to become more aggressive. The warden used collective pronouns fifty-seven times (once every thirty words) to try to communicate that he and the guard were in this together, on the same team. For as we have seen, this type of communal language communicates a sense of cohesion and solidarity.

The discovery of these materials dramatically changes the conclusions we draw from this famous study. Many of the guards did indeed end up behaving brutally toward the prisoners, but their behavior was by no means inevitable or automatic. They were coaxed into aggressive action by leaders who framed the study as an “us” versus “them” situation, actively intervened when their followers resisted, used the language of identity, and built norms of brutality.

The Stanford Prison Experiment is a microcosm of some of the processes involved when social identities turn ugly. Haslam and Reicher have described a progression of stages by which leaders move their groups toward evil, ultimately culminating in violence or even genocide.36 The initial steps are common and relatively benign. Leaders foster a cohesive group identity, in part by establishing boundaries between “us” and “them.” Boundaries are not inherently problematic. After all, competition between sports teams, between companies, and between nations at events like the Olympics all make boundaries highly salient.

Boundaries become perilous when leaders define outsiders as threats, convincing followers that they pose a significant, even existential, danger to the beloved group. The peril is often particularly acute when leaders’ rhetoric excludes people who would otherwise be included in the group. Throughout history, all manner of minority groups, including immigrants, Jews, and sexual minorities, have been targeted in this way. It is not uncommon to see groups on a trajectory toward violence starting to refer to people they have defined as outsiders as being traitors or something less than human: parasites, rats, or cockroaches.

The final stages occur in quick succession. Leaders portray their group as uniquely virtuous. We are the source of true goodness in the world, so much so that anything we do must inherently be good. We must defend our virtue and overcome evil at all costs. From here, it is a short step to celebrating violence and brutality as virtues. We are the sole source of righteousness, so if outsiders threaten our goodness or our very existence, they deserve to be suppressed, oppressed, or wiped out. Through this distorted lens, killing is presented to followers as a moral good, even an imperative.

This is how leaders throughout history have justified cruelty and aggression. The actions and language of leaders matter enormously and large-scale brutality never occurs in a vacuum.

In his book The Anatomy of Fascism, historian Robert Paxton described the “mobilizing passions” that produce and sustain fascist movements.37 Among these he includes “the belief that one’s group is a victim, a sentiment that justifies any action without legal or moral limits against its enemies, both internal and external.… The need for closer integration of a purer community by consent if possible or by exclusionary violence if necessary.… The superiority of the leader’s instincts over abstract and universal reason.”

Groups do not get here without identity leadership, reminding us that social identities can be a powerful tool for good or for evil. Yet no leader’s story goes uncontested and no story is so strong that it cannot be resisted. We have focused most of this chapter on leaders whose lives and stories embodied an inclusive vision for their groups. But many of them were, of course, opposed by other potential leaders with different and sometimes more exclusionary visions.

As we said earlier, leadership can be understood, in many ways, as a battle of stories. It is incumbent on us, as followers and sometimes leaders ourselves, to decide which side of these battles we are on. We get to decide which identity stories we want to embrace, which stories about where we are coming from, where we are going, and what we must fear, struggle against, and dream of we want to live out.