The Lens of Identity




An audience of four hundred million sat glued to their seats as the final game of the 1966 FIFA World Cup moved into overtime. With the world’s most coveted championship trophy on the line, England and West Germany were deadlocked, two to two. More than ten nail-biting minutes of extra time had elapsed when English player Alan Ball passed the ball to Geoff Hurst, a lanky striker from Lancashire.

Hurst shot the ball off his right foot toward the goal as he fell to the ground. The ball edged over the outstretched fingertips of the German keeper, struck the bottom of the crossbar, ricocheted toward the goal line, and was cleared away by West German defenders.

The world championship rested on what had happened during that split second.

The English players, believing they had won the game, began to celebrate. The crowd roared! Yet Swiss referee Gottfried Dienst was not sure that England had actually scored. At the time, Dienst was considered the best referee in the world. Uncertain, he consulted with his assistant before making the critical decision: the ball had crossed the line. Goal!

Video footage would ultimately show that the ball had not, in fact, crossed the line. England should not have won the 1966 World Cup 4–2—at least, not with that score line. Yet the English player closest to the ball, Roger Hunt, swore that he had seen the ball cross the line and enter the net. Surely he must have seen it, otherwise he would have moved to tap it in rather than turning away to celebrate.

He saw what he wanted to see.

This situation might seem like a rarity. How often is the most widely viewed athletic contest in the world determined by such a contentious play? Yet sports fans everywhere constantly find themselves at odds with referees, umpires, and judges. The problem is that many fans are so affected by their own team identities that they feel that everyone else’s decision-making is hopelessly biased—especially when the situation is ambiguous.

Research on this issue began following a football game played by two Ivy League teams at Palmer Stadium in Princeton, New Jersey, on a brisk Saturday afternoon in late November 1951. It was the last game of the season, and the Princeton University Tigers were trying to finish the year undefeated by beating the Dartmouth University Indians.

It quickly became clear that this was going to be a rough game. Players collided, anger rose, and violence swiftly escalated. Before long, Princeton’s brilliant All-American quarterback Dick Kazmaier left the field with a broken nose. (He would later win the Heisman Trophy, which is awarded annually to the best player in college football, by the largest vote margin in history.) Losing their superstar infuriated the Princeton players. They retaliated. And in the third quarter, a Dartmouth player was carried off the field with a broken leg.

Princeton won the game thirteen to nothing. But that wasn’t the end of the story.

The blame game started immediately. The Princeton student newspaper called the game a “disgusting exhibition” and reported that the “blame must be laid primarily on Dartmouth’s doorstep.” The Dartmouth student paper staff, however, saw it very differently. They alleged that Princeton coach Charlie Caldwell had “instilled the old see-what-they-did-go-get-them attitude” in his players.

This feisty back-and-forth inspired psychologists at Dartmouth and Princeton to join forces to understand how it was that members of their exclusive colleges could disagree so fiercely about the objective facts of the game. They administered a questionnaire to Dartmouth and Princeton students a week after the game.1 Just like the journalists from their college newspapers, Princeton and Dartmouth students had radically different interpretations of the game. Overall, one hundred twenty-two students claimed that the other team had started the rough play, and only two believed that their own team had initiated it!

Let us say that again: 122 to 2. A nearly unanimous verdict that it was the other guys’ fault.

Because these disagreements could be chalked up to errors of memory or exposure to the biased newspaper reports, the researchers brought in a new batch of students from each school and showed them footage from the game. They recorded these students’ responses as they watched the game unfold before their eyes. Maybe the video would provide a reality check.

Even though they were all looking at the same visual evidence, students from the two colleges continued to disagree about the facts of the game. Princeton students claimed that the Dartmouth players committed more than twice as many infractions as the Princeton players had; Dartmouth students claimed that the number of infractions was nearly identical for both teams. Even as they all watched the same video, students at each university still seemed to see very different things.

In case you are tempted to dismiss this as just the delusions of some college students, consider the telegram that a Dartmouth alumnus in Ohio sent to his alma mater. He had received footage of the game from friends, a group of Princeton alumni, who told him all about the dastardly behavior of his beloved Dartmouth team. But upon watching the footage, he couldn’t see the fouls they had told him about and was genuinely puzzled.

Planning to show a tape of the game at an upcoming alumni event, he sent a telegram to Dartmouth administrators. “Preview of Princeton movies indicates considerable cutting of important part STOP please wire explanation and possibly air mail missing part before showing scheduled for January 25 STOP we have splicing equipment.”

He assumed that some of the terrible fouls he’d heard about from his Princeton friends must have been cut from the tape!

Writing over sixty years ago, the researchers concluded, “the ‘same’ sensory impingements emanating from the football field, transmitted through the visual mechanism to the brain, also obviously gave rise to different experiences in different people.” In other words, the fans were biased—they saw the game through the lens of their identification with the team, detecting every violation committed by their opponents but turning a blind eye to infractions by their own players.

This study reveals something important about human perception: we are often driven by our identities to interpret the world in a certain way. In the next chapter, we will discuss how this plays out when it comes to our beliefs about the world. Here, we see that it extends even to perceptual judgments—what we see, hear, taste, and smell.

In the course of any game, there are dozens, if not hundreds, of ambiguous events that are open to interpretation through the lens of one’s identity. Modern advances in refereeing and technology now allow for instant replays to help sort out these ambiguous situations. But the impact of identity on judgment goes well beyond the sports stadium to domains of life where instant replay cannot offer a correction for our judgments.

For the past decade, the two of us have examined how group identities—ranging from sports teams to political parties to nations—can profoundly influence how people interpret the world around them. These dynamics play out everywhere—at the dinner table and in the criminal justice system. And while identities can heighten our senses, causing us to better savor the smell of chocolate or crave the taste of savory grits, they can also impair our ability to perceive things accurately or fairly. Much of this is happening outside our awareness. And few, if any, of us are immune.





Identity-Colored Glasses


We don’t see things as they are; we see them as we are.

—Anaïs Nin, Seduction of the Minotaur



Every moment in the day, there is more information reaching your sensory organs than can possibly be consciously processed. Attention enables your nervous system to select a portion of what is (hopefully) the most relevant information in order to process it more deeply. A great deal of information filtering occurs before people become consciously aware that something—a movement, a sound, the emission of a scent—has happened. Having a system for sorting the sensory wheat from the chaff is more than useful, it is essential.

A classic example of this is known as the “cocktail party effect.”2 At any large gathering, the buzzing of music and conversation resides mainly in the background as you pay attention to the person you’re talking to. Your brain filters out the noise to allow you to focus on whatever fascinating story or gossip your friend is relaying.

Now, what happens if someone mentions your name in a conversation across the room? If you are like most people, hearing your name breaks through the background noise and shifts your attention. Suddenly you are all ears, attuned to what is being said about you. Are they speaking kindly or sharing an embarrassing anecdote?

This cocktail party effect occurs because your brain is not ignoring everything in the background. While you were chatting away, your unconscious mind was monitoring the surrounding conversations in case something relevant happened. Someone saying your name to other people, of course, is just about the most relevant thing that can happen!

How attention works is very complex, but you can think about what catches people’s attention as coming in two different forms. Some things capture attention because they are salient in the environment. Sudden movements, strange noises, beautiful or noxious things, and your own name—all of these warrant your attention so that you can react to them appropriately. This type of orienting of attention is sometimes described as “bottom-up” processing.

Other things, however, capture your attention because you are already on the lookout for them. Things that you expect, want, or need tend to receive more attention because your brain has already decided that they are relevant. When you are looking for your car keys, for example, you will probably find your eyes drawn to everything small and shiny as your visual system seeks out the object you urgently need. This type of attentional orienting is known as “top-down” processing. Goals, needs, desires, and, yes, identities change what your sensory system is focused on.

When you adopt an identity, it is as if you put on a pair of glasses that filter your view of the world.3 Identity helps you grapple with the vast amount of information continually bombarding your senses. It tells you what is important, where to look, when to listen, and perhaps even what to taste.

Once you join a group, you gain insight into what “we” (the members of the group) consider important and, therefore, what you can safely ignore. And this works well, for the most part. On the job, for example, you probably pay extra attention to your boss, attend the right workshops, and figure out how to navigate office politics. You learn to ignore certain kinds of e-mails, large meetings, and work events that suck your time and energy.

At the end of the day, you go home and put on a different lens to negotiate your family obligations, noisy neighbors, and friendships at the local pub. This is one of the most useful elements of identity. Just as people can switch from sunglasses to regular glasses when they enter a dark building or put on reading glasses in front of the computer, they can switch identities as they move from one situation to the next.

People possess different identities, and they shift how they perceive the world as different aspects of their selves are activated. For bicultural individuals, this effect may be even more profound. For people with more than one cultural or ethnic identity, different situations can activate distinct parts of themselves that then influence how they think about and perceive the people around them.

Cultural neuroscientist Joan Chiao and her colleagues have conducted fascinating research on this phenomenon.4 In one experiment, she had Black, White, and biracial participants (individuals who had a White and a Black parent) complete a visual attention task. On each trial, participants were presented with up to eight faces for half a second. Sometimes their job was to quickly determine if there was a single Black face among a crowd of White faces. On other trials, they had to determine if there was a single White face among a crowd of Black faces.

Chiao and colleagues found that every group of participants was faster to visually identify Black faces among White crowds than White faces among Black crowds. However, there were two interesting findings that revealed how racial identity shaped visual attention. The first was that Black participants were faster than White participants at identifying Black faces in a crowd. They could spot an in-group member in a heartbeat.

The second striking thing was what happened among biracial individuals. What we did not mention earlier was that before starting the visual attention task, these participants had been asked to write a short essay about the ethnic identity of one of their parents. This task was designed to activate one or the other of their cultural identities. And it changed how they reacted to the visual displays.

When bicultural participants’ White ethnic identity was activated, their patterns of visual attention looked almost identical to the White participants’. But when their Black ethnic identity was activated, their patterns of visual attention looked almost identical to the Black participants’. In other words, their attentional system had shifted in line with whichever identity was active at that moment.

For humans, vision is usually the most powerful sense. For dogs, it’s smell; for bats, sound. But when it comes to identity, other sensations can be particularly potent and evocative: The smell of your grandmother’s cooking or the specific scent of a location. The sound of a particular language or a song learned in childhood. The tastes of your culture’s time-honored, traditional foods.

Indeed, there appears to be a profound connection between food and identity. As the late chef and author Anthony Bourdain put it in an interview for Slate, “Food is everything we are. It’s an extension of nationalist feeling, ethnic feeling, your personal history, your province, your region, your tribe, your grandma. It’s inseparable from those from the get-go.”





The Taste of Identity


In the 1992 movie My Cousin Vinny, Joe Pesci plays a New York City lawyer defending his cousin, who is on trial for a murder he did not commit. Dislocated to Alabama, this brash Italian American from the Big Apple tries to navigate the culture of the rural American South.

In a key scene, Pesci goes to a local diner and learns that grits, made from boiled cornmeal, are a big part of Southern identity. Cooking grits properly takes twenty minutes, and it’s a matter of Southern pride not to use the instant version.

Soon after, Pesci’s character begins questioning one of the prosecution’s witnesses, a Southerner by the name of Mr. Tipton. Tipton says that he was just starting to make his breakfast when he saw Vinny’s cousin enter a store, and five minutes later, as Tipton was about to eat his breakfast, he heard a gunshot.

What did Tipton have for breakfast? Vinny wants to know. Eggs and grits, Tipton tells him. Vinny, with his newfound knowledge of Southern cooking, knows old-fashioned grits don’t cook that fast, so he asks Tipton if he made instant grits for breakfast. This is a major insult, an affront to Tipton’s Southern pride! At this moment, the witness has to admit either that his testimony was faulty or that he has betrayed his Southern heritage with an inferior form of grits.

The life of an innocent man hangs in the balance.

In front of the judge and a courtroom packed with members of his community, the witness decides he must defend his Southern identity even if it reveals that his timeline of events cannot be trusted. Tipton aggressively announces, “No self-respectin’ Southerner uses instant grits. I take pride in my grits.”

Would someone admit to false testimony just to defend his or her grits? Maybe not. But this was never about the grits; it was about identity. And because cultural traditions are often tightly interwoven with eating, there is a deep connection for many people between their identities and their food.

People travel the world to try exotic cuisines, but even a tour around a single country can reveal a vast multiplicity of tastes, textures, ingredients, and culinary traditions. In the United States, there are big differences in the culinary preferences of different regions. New Yorkers enjoy what they believe is the best pizza in the country, folks from Philadelphia savor their famous cheesesteaks, Californians are stereotyped for munching on avocado toast, and the South is known for grits, black-eyed peas, and delicious barbecue.

Drawing inspiration from My Cousin Vinny, we decided to study the links between Southern identity and people’s experiences of food. How deeply are preferences for grits woven into Southern identity? We wondered whether reminding people about their Southern identity would make them crave the foods associated with their traditions.

In a series of experiments led by Leor Hackel, we recruited more than two hundred fifty Southerners to tell us about their identity and their food preferences.5 The first thing we noticed was that our sample of Southerners varied widely in terms of how much they identified with the South. While many people reported that it was a central part of their identity, just as many felt little or no connection to the region. (As we discussed in chapter 1, this sort of variation is common within groups. For instance, some of our students deeply identify with their university. They wear the school colors, attend college sports, and talk about the school with incredible pride. But other students are ambivalent about their school or even actively disengaged from the community.)

After we had the Southerners tell us about their connection to the South, we asked them to rate a number of foods—from fried catfish to black-eyed peas—on how closely they were connected to Southern identity and how much they felt like eating each one. We wanted to see if there was a connection between the strength of their identity and how much they enjoyed Southern foods compared to foods from outside the region.

As we’d predicted, people’s degree of identification with the South was clearly associated with a preference for Southern cuisine. It wasn’t enough to come from the South—it was identification with the South that mattered when it came to food preferences. And, naturally, these proud Southerners had less interest in pizza, tuna sandwiches, and other food from other places. Identity matters when it comes to food preferences; it gives the food an emotional resonance that goes beyond the calories.

But as we have seen throughout, identities are not a stable or static thing. People from the South always have this cultural heritage, but that doesn’t mean this aspect of the self is active or in play at every moment. Like the bankers who behaved more dishonestly when their banker identities were activated, Southerners, we suspected, would be more Southern in their culinary tastes when this identity was primed and they actually cared about the identity.

In a second study with a new set of people, we activated the subjects’ Southern identity by having half of them describe two things that Southerners do often, two things they do well, and four traits associated with Southerners—two positive and two negative. The other half were asked to describe things they do as individuals and positive and negative traits they would ascribe to themselves. These questions were designed to activate either their Southern identity or their personal identity so we could see whether this would change their food preferences.

It was only after their Southern identity was brought to the front of their minds that Southerners preferred the taste of grits, collard greens, and other Southern delicacies more than those who had had their personal identity activated. When people were encouraged to think of themselves as individuals and focus on their own personality traits, their taste for Southern cuisine was unrelated to their Southern identity.

We found similar results when we took our project to an outdoor market in Ottawa, the capital city of Canada.6 We teamed up with our colleague Michael Wohl, a psychology professor at Carleton University, who set up a booth in the ByWard Market—one of the oldest public markets in the country—and offered passersby the opportunity to compare the sweet tastes of fresh honey and maple syrup.

While both are sugary and sticky, only maple syrup is a symbol of Canadian identity. The Maple Leaf is, of course, displayed prominently on the center of the national flag, and Canada even has a national strategic reserve of maple syrup in case of an emergency shortage (no kidding). Like hockey and beavers, maple syrup is considered a national treasure.

When our sample of Canadians did the taste test, they responded in much the same way that their neighbors in the American South had: they preferred the food associated with their heritage (maple syrup in this case), but only when we had activated their Canadian identity first. Thinking about Canadian identity whet their appetite for delicious maple syrup but not honey.

Our studies suggest that activating an identity can influence the sort of foods that people crave. Perhaps this is why many restaurants offering culturally specific cuisines strive to create an authentic ambience. It may be that adorning the walls of a Greek restaurant with images of the Parthenon or playing K-pop hits at a Korean barbecue place helps deepen a desire for dishes associated with those cultures.

This is not limited to adults (or K-pop stans); kids have social identities too and use similar cues to guide their eating. One series of studies with young children found that kids as young as one year old used social identity cues to determine what to eat. When the infants were given a choice between two foods, they chose the one endorsed by someone who spoke their native language and turned up their noses at the one that had been endorsed by someone speaking a foreign language.7

From a very young age, humans are sensitive to cues about identity, and language appears to be one of the most powerful signals of shared connection. This is a striking finding because kids at the age of one can hardly be described as foodies and they have to look to adults for guidance about what to eat. Yet they seem to intuit a connection between food and identity before they understand a great many other things.

This research reveals how identity shapes our food preferences and probably our diets. But it only scratches the surface of how different identities shape the way people experience the world. We believe that these preferences extend beyond mere cravings and can actually shape basic perceptions more directly, even influencing the sense of smell.





Smells like Chocolate


To investigate deeper effects of identity, we conducted a series of studies at the University of Geneva in Switzerland with our colleague Géraldine Coppin.8 We wanted to investigate how identity shapes how people smell the world around them using one of our own guilty pleasures—chocolate (although Dom prefers his dark, while Jay is a fan of smoother milk varieties).

Switzerland is famous for its banks, stunning alps, multi-tooled army knives, and some of the world’s best chocolatiers. To create the stimuli for this experiment, we worked with chemists to create scented felt-tip markers (like the fruit-scented markers kids use) that smelled like delicious Swiss chocolate.

We had Swiss as well as non-Swiss citizens, all students at the same university in Geneva, come into the lab. Just as with our studies on Southern food and maple syrup, we randomly selected a subset of our participants and reminded them of their Swiss identities. Others were reminded of their personal identities. We then had them smell the chocolate-scented markers twenty times and we recorded how intensely they detected the smell each time. This allowed us to look at the effect of identity on smell over time.

To provide a control condition, we used markers that smelled like buttery popcorn. Both scents were of easily recognized foods. But while people might associate the smell of popcorn with going to the movies, we assumed that the scent of chocolate would have a strong association with Swiss identity. We expected that only the scent of chocolate would resonate with our Swiss participants, especially when they were thinking about the world through the lens of their Swiss identity.

It is normal in experiments like this for people to find all smells intense at first, but due to a process known as habituation, they detect them less and less intensely over time. You have probably had the experience of walking into a bakery and being hit by an overwhelming aroma of freshly baked bread or into an office where all you can smell is someone’s perfume. After a few minutes, though, the smell recedes and becomes part of the background. It is still detectable if you think about it but it’s no longer overpowering. Your sensory system has adapted.

The same thing happened when the people in our study smelled the popcorn. At first, this smell was intense, but eventually it faded. In fact, in almost every condition of our experiment, including the one with the chocolate-scented marker, people exhibited habituation. There was, however, one striking exception: Swiss citizens who had been reminded of their Swiss identity did not habituate to the smell of chocolate. This sweet smell remained strong to them even after the twentieth trial. It was an aromatic reminder of their identity. Thinking about things like the beautiful Swiss Alps, high-end watches, and their world-famous banking system appeared to alter their sensitivity to chocolate.

Chocolate has, for most people anyway, a delightful, enticing scent. But odors range from the tantalizing to the terrible. Could social identities influence the experience of some of life’s more ghastly smells as well? A team of researchers in the United Kingdom, led by Stephen Reicher, decided to find out.9

The materials they used in this study certainly rank among the more unusual. They asked a male research assistant to wear the same T-shirt for a week, including while he engaged in exercise and even while he slept. After being worn for a week, the shirt, it’s safe to say, was fairly pungent. It was then carefully sealed in an airtight container to maintain the odor until the study was ready to commence.

A while later, unsuspecting and unfortunate students from the University of Sussex were asked if they would mind taking a whiff of the odorous garment. (Imagine showing up for a study and being asked to sniff someone else’s dirty laundry.) After smelling the shirt, they rated their level of disgust. Naturally, most reported feeling a great deal of it.

But the researchers used a clever trick to see if social identity might influence how people respond to nasty odors. All of the participants had to smell the stinky shirt, which bore a logo from the University of Brighton, a rival institution. But half the students had their own University of Sussex identity made salient before smelling the shirt, while the other half were randomly selected to have their broader identity as college students made salient.

One might imagine that when it comes to body odor, thinking about oneself specifically as a Sussex student versus a college student in general should have little bearing on how repulsive one finds it. But in fact, students reported less disgust when they smelled a T-shirt from a rival institution if they were thinking about themselves as part of the broader category of students. Making their shared identity salient made the musty shirt a bit more tolerable.

The researchers ran another version of the study in Scotland with students from St. Andrews University.10 In this case, they had a female student go for a jog in two different T-shirts, one with a navy-blue St. Andrews logo and one with the logo of Dundee, a rival university.

They found that people used more hand sanitizer and spent a longer time washing their hands after holding a stinky shirt associated with the rival university than they did after holding one from their own. A shared sense of social identity again seemed to stop their stomachs from turning (or at least turning as much) when handling the dirty shirts.

Research on smell reveals rather dramatically how identities shape our perception of the world. Whether we’re sniffing something pleasing or something nasty, our sensory experiences are shaped by what is inside and what is outside the identity we currently have activated. It is time now to explore more deeply how the lens of identity affects perceptions beyond the boundary—how it affects perceptions of “outsiders.”





See Your Friends Close and Your Enemies Closer


From the Great Wall of China to the controversial unfinished border wall between Mexico and the United States, humans have invested immense amounts of blood and treasure to keep outsiders at a distance. In some cases, the threats were real, but in others, they were nonexistent or exaggerated.

Over the past few years, some of our research has investigated relationships between group conflict and the experience of space, particularly the perception of physical distance between groups. In one set of studies led by Jenny Xiao, we found that people who felt threatened by an out-group judged that group as physically closer than people who felt more secure did.11

People who agreed with statements like “Immigration from Mexico is undermining American culture” thought that Mexico City was closer to their own location than people who did not experience a sense of threat from immigration. We found this pattern when we ran a study with New Yorkers and again when we surveyed people from across the United States. Regardless of where people lived, a sense of threat made the out-group loom closer in their minds.

The out-group also loomed larger. In another study, people who felt this sort of threat thought the volume of immigrants coming across the border into the United States was significantly larger than people who were not threatened did.12

Strikingly, this pattern was driven by feelings of what psychologists call symbolic or cultural threats rather than realistic threats. People experiencing symbolic threats feel that their cultures, and therefore their very identities, are being eroded by out-group members. People experiencing realistic threats are focused instead on more practical matters; they may believe, for example, that out-group members are taking their jobs or overusing an important resource. For many Americans, symbolic but not practical concerns about immigration made them exaggerate the proximity of an out-group.

But it is important to note that this was observed only among strongly identified Americans. The people who reported the most pride in their own country were also the ones who had the tightest link between their sense of symbolic threat and their impression that Mexico City was too close for comfort. People who were not deeply identified as Americans did not show the same pattern.

This all changed if people thought there was a strong boundary between the United States and Mexico. After reading that the southern border was “among the most heavily protected in the world,” Americans who felt threatened by immigration no longer overestimated their proximity to Mexico City. However, if they were reminded that the border was “frequently crossed” and “largely unsecured,” we found a nearly identical pattern to before.

Shortly after we finished this project, Donald Trump ran for president on the promise of building a wall between the United States and Mexico. The idea became such a central part of his campaign that Trump and his supporters would chant “Build that wall! Build that wall!” at his political rallies.13 Despite the fact that most experts thought a wall was bad policy and ineffective at addressing immigration issues, Trump became obsessed with the wall. He capitalized on the psychology the two of us were seeing in our own studies, exacerbating feelings of symbolic threat to increase supporters’ concerns about immigration and immigrants.

Constructing literal and metaphorical barriers to outsiders is a time-tested strategy for gaining political power (one that we will discuss further in chapter 9 when we talk about leadership). But these dynamics don’t apply only to immigrants or in political contexts. We found similar patterns of judgments when we examined other forms of social identity.

We started by sending our research team to a baseball game at Yankee Stadium on a beautiful summer night in New York City. As the Yankees fans (along with a mix of tourists and fans of other teams) streamed into the stands, we asked a set of them to fill out questionnaires indicating their favorite team and their feelings toward other teams. Then we handed them unlabeled maps of the East Coast, a five-hundred-mile stretch extending from North Carolina to Maine. We asked each of them to indicate the stadium location of the Yankees’ archrivals, the Boston Red Sox (who play at Fenway Park), or of another team in their division, the Baltimore Orioles (who play at Camden Yards). The map included a pin indicating the location of Yankee Stadium, which was roughly halfway between the two other stadiums. Done accurately, the participant would mark an X about 190 miles to the north in the heart of Boston for Fenway Park or about 170 miles to the south in Baltimore for Camden Yards.

It is well known in the baseball world that Yankees and Red Sox fans despise each other. Many consider this the fiercest rivalry in American sports. At the time of our study, the Yankees were leading their division, and the Red Sox were in second place, only one game behind. The Orioles were dead last (a total of twenty-three games behind the Yankees) and had absolutely no hope of making the playoffs. This heated race between the Yankees and the Red Sox was just one more reason for their fans to hate each other after a century of animosity.

Feelings of animosity influenced people’s judgments of physical distance. New York Yankees fans thought that the Boston Red Sox stadium was closer than the stadium of the Baltimore Orioles. In reality, it’s the other way around. Critically, when we asked the same question of non-Yankees fans at the game, they were more accurate, correctly indicating, on average, that the home of the Orioles was closer to New York than that of the Red Sox.14

We also found that it didn’t matter if people had been to these cities or felt confident in their judgments. The expertise they might have gained by traveling did not seem to help Yankees fans make more accurate judgments. The intense competition apparently overcame their experience.

These misperceptions had consequences. We ran another study with Yankees fans a year later to see if feelings of proximity to their nemeses might motivate them to engage in discrimination.15 This time around, we manipulated their sense of closeness by showing them one of two images of the Red Sox and Yankees logos. In one image, the logos were close together (maybe too close for comfort); in the other, they were far away.

Yankees fans who saw the hated Red Sox logo as spatially closer to their own team’s were more willing to support discriminatory policies against them. These fans endorsed giving Red Sox fans lower-priority seating at Yankee Stadium. We also showed Yankees fans the stadium’s seating chart and had them mark where they thought Red Sox fans should sit. To our surprise, several of these Yankees fans wanted to kick Red Sox fans out of the stadium entirely!

Our studies reveal how social identity can provide a lens for interpreting the world that amplifies intergroup conflict. But we believe this represents only the tip of the iceberg. Aspects of identity can contribute to biases in perception that have enormous repercussions, including starkly negative consequences for justice within legal systems.





Visual Policing


In August 2014, police in St. Louis, Missouri, shot and killed twenty-five-year-old Kajieme Powell, a Black man with a history of mental-health issues. Fewer than twenty seconds elapsed from the time the police arrived on the scene to arrest Mr. Powell for allegedly shoplifting two energy drinks and some doughnuts to the time they fired several bullets at him.

This tragedy unfolded miles from Ferguson, Missouri, where Michael Brown Jr. had been fatally shot by a police officer just days earlier. The violent deaths of these two Black men at the hands of the police launched national protests against police violence.

Police statements about Kajieme Powell’s death were not consistent with video evidence. According to the police chief, Mr. Powell had “pulled out a knife and came at the officers, gripping and holding it high” and was “within 2 or 3 feet of the officers” when they shot and killed him.16 However, a cell phone video of the shooting revealed that Powell was much farther away than a few feet and appeared to have his arms low at his sides.

The killing sparked a fierce debate about what had actually happened and whether the officers’ use of force was justified. After a long investigation of forensic, video, and witness evidence, St. Louis circuit attorney Jennifer M. Joyce “determined a criminal violation against either officer could not be proven beyond a reasonable doubt.” Her decision not to charge the officers was consistent with a national pattern—very few police officers are charged following deadly interactions with citizens.

When police officers started wearing body cameras, many people thought it would help resolve controversies about what happened during interactions with civilians; the videos would provide an objective account of what actually occurred. The hope was that body-camera footage would hold police and citizens alike accountable. Finally, judgments about what happened during fraught interactions would be grounded in hard evidence. Judges and juries could see with their own eyes what had unfolded in these deadly encounters.

Hundreds of police departments around the world have invested large sums to outfit their officers with body cameras in the hope that it will improve policing. Some departments have randomly assigned officers to wear cameras. Results are mixed and it is not clear that they reduce the amount of force that police use or complaints about police conduct from the public.17 Another question is whether the videos themselves reduce bias in criminal justice investigations. Do they allow prosecutors, juries, and judges to get a better handle on what actually happened?

Law professor Seth Stoughton of the University of South Carolina created a series of videos to directly investigate how effective body cameras were in creating agreement around police encounters.18 Stoughton, a former police officer himself, supports initiatives to have officers wear cameras to help determine what happened in these interactions.

Despite Stoughton’s hopes, however, people did not see his videos uniformly. Most people usually agreed that the officer in these videos faced a threat to his safety. But people who had a high level of trust in the police were more likely to believe that the officer faced a serious threat to his life than people who distrusted the police were.

As with many real-life encounters caught on tape, the videos were ambiguous, which allowed for people’s preconceptions and beliefs about the police to influence their judgments. Like a Rorschach inkblot test, what people saw in these videos tended to be shaped by what they already believed, influencing their interpretations of confrontations between the police and citizens. People differed in their identification with the police and with the civilians in these videos. These affiliations, in turn, guided them to view the same interactions quite differently.

To better understand the role of identification and visual attention during these sorts of judgments, Yael Granot and her colleagues monitored people’s eye movements as they watched video clips of physical confrontations between police officers and suspects.19 Participants in her studies watched forty-five-second videos of actual altercations between police officers and civilians in which it was ambiguous if the police officers engaged in unethical or violent behavior, such as using too much force when arresting a suspect.

In one clip, an officer attempted to handcuff a suspect who had swallowed a package of drugs and was resisting arrest. They struggled and the officer pushed the suspect against the police cruiser. The suspect then bit the officer’s arm, after which the officer hit the suspect on the back of the head. As people watched the videos, the researchers secretly observed their visual attention using an eye-tracker built into the computer monitor. Afterward, the participants were asked if and to what extent the officer should be punished for hitting the suspect.

Despite seeing exactly the same videos, there was a startling lack of agreement among participants. People who identified with the police and spent more time visually focused on the officers in the videos were less likely to want the officers punished than people who did not identify with the police but also had their eyes fixed on what the officers did.

In short, the videos did little to resolve conflicting impressions. Rather, the more attention people paid to the officers, the more polarized they were in their punishment decisions. By directing their attention to the officers, people were able to spin a psychological story about blame that aligned with their preexisting identities.

The fact is that identities provide us with ideas, philosophies, theories, and languages that draw our attention to what matters and help us to explain to ourselves (and others) what is unfolding in the world around us. These identities shape our perception of the social and physical world, altering where we look and how we interpret the environment. This selective attention and filtering process helps explain why people can experience the same events yet come to very different conclusions about what transpired. Thankfully, there are some potential solutions to these challenges.





Different Perspectives


Bias in policing is not the only case where seeing the world through the lens of identity can produce problems for society, but it is one of the most important. Unfortunately, the lens of identity influences not only how third parties judge the actions of police officers but also how police officers judge civilians. To provide just one example, researchers examined nearly one hundred million police stops across the United States from 2011 to 2018 to determine how visual information about racial identity shaped police decisions.20

The racial identities of drivers are more visible to police officers during the day; after the sun sets, it is harder to detect the race of someone behind the wheel. This is important because a fair amount of policing involves making decisions in ambiguous circumstances. Is a car being driven erratically? Is a person acting suspicious? Does a driver look like a wanted suspect? How the police handle these little decisions can have big consequences.

If the color of someone’s skin affects whether an officer chooses to pull a person over, there should be larger racial disparities in traffic stops during the day than at night, when race is harder to distinguish. This is indeed what the researchers found. Black drivers made up a smaller proportion of traffic stops after dark than they did during the day. Under a “veil of darkness,” the officers made decisions that were less racially biased. They could no longer use racial identity and stereotypes to make sense of otherwise ambiguous information.

The research team also analyzed police officers’ decisions to search a person’s car for illegal materials such as drugs or weapons. Here, too, there was evidence of racial bias. At municipal police departments, for example, Black drivers were searched in over 9 percent of traffic stops, Hispanic drivers in 7 percent, and White drivers in only 4 percent.

When searches were conducted, however, officers actually found contraband more often when the driver was White. For these same departments, 18 percent of the White drivers they searched were in possession of illegal materials; this occurred for only 11 percent of Hispanic and 14 percent of Black drivers. So Black drivers were less likely than White drivers to be in possession of illegal materials if they were pulled over, but because they were pulled over significantly more often, Black drivers were arrested more often than White drivers.

These sorts of patterns are due to psychological biases among police officers as they decide every day on the job whom to pull over and whom to search. Their use of visual information—in this case, skin color—shapes how they interpret and act on other information.

It turns out that this is a situation where identity is part of the problem but can also provide a partial solution. A recent large-scale study in Chicago, for example, found that increasing the diversity of police officers made a significant difference in policing behavior.21 Black and Hispanic officers made fewer stops and arrests and used force less often than White officers. This was especially true in their interactions with Black civilians. When the researchers closely examined the data, they noticed that these differences stemmed from a reduced focus on enforcing low-level offenses among Black civilians. These are the sorts of ambiguous scenarios in which identity-based cues are most likely to guide people’s attention and interpretation.

These data show very concretely why representation matters. In the case of policing, hiring more racially and ethnically diverse officers who better represent many of the communities they police can help reduce the aggressive forms of law enforcement that result in racially disparate outcomes. These officers are able to see the world through a different lens, which changes how they interpret and police ambiguous situations.

We believe the same principles apply in other contexts and organizations. Our identities help us make sense of the world. They reveal many things but obscure others. If we focus on one thing, we inevitably miss something else. Worse, we struggle to recognize our own biases. Though we can readily see how other people’s perceptions are fallible, we often fail to see how our own experiences are filtered through the lenses of our identities.

Researchers call this the “bias blind spot,” and it is common. One set of studies on 661 Americans found that more than 85 percent believed they were less biased than the average citizen.22 Remarkably, only a single person acknowledged being more biased than average. Understanding that identity shapes our interpretations of everything from sporting events to policing should give us pause. Before we jump to conclusions, it is worth reflecting not only on our potential biases but on the fact that these biases are often invisible to us.

We have focused extensively in this chapter on the ways in which identities shape perception, in part because recognizing biases in ourselves is a step toward a solution. In the next chapter, we will examine how groups shape our very beliefs about the world—and, critically, how we can build identities that strive for accuracy and truth.