Finding Solidarity




Sylvia Rosalie Jacobson, an associate professor of social work at Florida State University, was making her way home to the United States from Jerusalem in September 1970.1 Shortly after taking off from Frankfurt, her plane—TWA Flight 741—was hijacked by members of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP). Along with one hundred forty-eight other passengers and crew, she was flown to a remote airstrip in the middle of the Jordanian desert.

After a nerve-racking landing, the plane was boarded by members of the PFLP. Illuminated by a flashlight, a female leader delivered a terrifying message: No one would be leaving the desert until the hijackers’ demands—including the release of prisoners—had been met. At this moment, Sylvia Jacobson later wrote, “For the first time, we realized that we were all hostages. We had become a community of our own in an unfamiliar environment under threat and stress.”2

Conditions on the plane slowly deteriorated as the days dragged on. The cooling system broke down. The lavatories were overwhelmed. People fell ill. To make matters much worse, the hijackers began to remove certain passengers. First, non-Jewish women and children were bused to hotels in the capital city of Amman. Then, at irregular intervals, groups of men were taken away to undisclosed destinations, their fates unknown. Eventually, all of the men were removed, leaving many of the remaining women distraught.

Despite the passengers’ initial sense of unity in the desert, several sources of division began to emerge. A group of fourteen college students annoyed the other passengers by treating the experience as more of an adventure than an ordeal. Parents with children felt distinct from nonparents without such responsibilities. And then, a stark divide appeared between Jewish parents who allowed their children to eat the nonkosher food provided by their captors and those who did not.

A more menacing division occurred as their captors aggressively differentiated Jewish and American passengers from the rest. This split passengers who held two passports from those with only one. It was to the advantage of dual-passport holders to keep certain social identities concealed. But as repeated searches of the plane turned up these documents and the captors grew more angry, hiding passports seemed to increase everyone’s level of danger.

There were fitful attempts at organization and leadership among the passengers that at first went nowhere. Those who tried to take charge of supervising the lavatories or allocating food, for example, were sharply questioned about their legitimacy: “Who gave you any special rights?”

Amid the heat and the stress, the confusion and the discord, there were moments of unity when the passengers aboard Flight 741 regained a common sense of shared identity. This occurred when their captors treated them as a whole. When the hijackers and then soldiers trooped through the cabin, the passengers were keenly aware of their common fate. In those moments, Jacobson wrote, “divisiveness was subdued. Despite differences of nationality, religion, race, sorrows, needs, values, resentments, and fears, there was unity in a show of proud indifference, aloofness, and disdain to the inquisitive stares.”

Ultimately, the hostages managed to organize themselves when circumstances generated enough of a sense of shared fate and common goals. Toward the end of the fifth day, passengers learned that their water and food was going to be more strictly rationed. They began to coordinate arrangements for using the toilets and allocating the limited water supply. The college students became less insular and started to provide entertainment for the young children. The sense of solidarity tightened.

On September 11, 1970, after five overwhelming days of shifting moods, alliances, and identities, Sylvia Jacobson and most of the other distressed passengers were released to safety. The PFLP blew up the plane the next day. The crisis was not fully resolved until September 30, when the final hostages were freed in exchange for the release of Palestinian and Arab prisoners.

Professor Jacobson, like all the passengers, lived to tell the tale. But being a social scientist by training and a skilled observer of human dynamics, she did not just go on to regale people with her experiences at dinner parties. She published a scientific article about them, drawing insightful lessons about how groups function under conditions of significant duress.

The hijacking illuminates a fascinating set of group dynamics: how situations can activate new identities, how subgroups form and foster conflict, and how shared goals can provide a sense of solidarity and collective purpose, leading people to coordinate and sacrifice in service of the common good.

In this chapter, we will look at what happens when people come together in solidarity. A sense of common identity is key to understanding when people help and support one another. This happens in day-to-day life when people cooperate to achieve common goals, but it can also occur when they forge connections in challenging conditions. Just like the hostage situation described above, there are many instances in which people build new identities in times of stress. The social identities created during events like hijackings and terror attacks—not to mention stressful life situations like serious illnesses (or when a colleague chokes at a cocktail reception)—can provide a source of cohesion and resilience to tragedy and disaster.

It is often assumed that people look out for themselves in times of danger or threat. Countless Hollywood movies depict panic or rioting in emergency situations. But in reality, this rarely happens. A half-century of research on disasters, protests, and crowd behavior has found that dire circumstances often inspire the formation of shared identities that enable groups to coordinate effective responses to major challenges. Critically, shared identities also allow marginalized and disadvantaged groups, along with their allies, to mobilize against injustice and push for social change.





A Chance to Intervene


Like every undergraduate psychology student, Jay had heard the tragic tale of Kitty Genovese, a story first shared breathlessly by the New York Times. Jay knew (or thought he knew) that on the night of March 13, 1964,

for more than half an hour 38 respectable, law-abiding citizens in Queens watched a killer stalk and stab a woman in three separate attacks in Kew Gardens. Twice the sound of their voices and the sudden glow of their bedroom lights interrupted him and frightened him off. Each time he returned, sought her out and stabbed her again. Not one person telephoned the police during the assault; one witness called after the woman was dead.3



Exactly where the supposed total of thirty-eight witnesses came from is not clear. But the notion that so many citizens could callously observe the stabbing and murder of a fellow human being without intervening triggered widespread outrage. People decried the decay of civilization and the degradation of life in New York City.4

As researchers, we have had some of our best ideas pop into our minds as we read the news, and so it was in 1964 for psychologists John Darley and Bibb Latané, who were working in New York City at the time. Based on the tragic story of Kitty Genovese, they developed and tested a hypothesis that they called “the bystander effect.”5 Their hypothesis stated, in essence, that the more bystanders there are in an emergency situation, the less likely any given person is to help.

They theorized that there were at least two reasons why the presence of other people in an emergency can cause an individual not to act. First, it is not always clear what is and is not an emergency, and people often look to others to try to diagnose the situation. When you see that others are not reacting, you might assume that it is because they know it is not an emergency. This is a big problem if they happen to have reached precisely the same conclusion by gauging your reaction, or lack of it. This is known as pluralistic ignorance—when no one knows what is going on but assumes that everyone else does.

Second, if people somehow overcome this mutual state of ignorance to recognize an emergency situation for what it is, they may still fail to act due to a diffusion of responsibility, in which everyone assumes that someone else should take or perhaps already has taken care of it.

Darley and Latané designed clever laboratory experiments to test their idea. In one experiment, someone faked a seizure. In another, smoke began billowing under a door. They observed how participants responded to these crises when they were alone versus in the presence of other people who did nothing. Sure enough, people were less likely to help when there were others around than when they were alone.

Jay learned about pluralistic ignorance and diffusion of responsibility as an undergraduate student at the University of Alberta. Around the same time, a group of young people, unimpeded by others, attacked an innocent man on the Edmonton subway, once again prompting cries from the public about decaying civilization and big city depravity. In response, Jay wrote a letter to the local newspaper pointing out that the failure of other people to stop the attack may have stemmed, in part, from the bystander effect. He also argued that knowing more about human psychology in these situations might help people overcome these sorts of barriers and take action.

Little did he know that before long, he would have a chance to put this theory to the test.

Jay moved from Alberta to the University of Toronto to complete his PhD in social psychology. One day, he got off the subway after an afternoon of Christmas shopping and was about to leave the station when he noticed a young man running in the opposite direction. The man, who appeared to be about twenty years old, hurdled over the turnstiles without buying a ticket and jumped down a stairwell.

A few seconds later, the young man returned, dragging a woman much smaller than himself up the stairs. He slammed her against the wall and yelled in her face. She was crying as he grabbed her shoulders and shook her violently. Dozens of commuters noticed the commotion and craned their necks to see what was going on. But when they saw what was happening, most averted their eyes and walked past in a rush to catch their evening trains.

Jay ran to report what was happening to a Toronto City Transit employee behind a wall of plexiglass. As the transit official called security, Jay wondered if he had done enough. He sized up the man, who seemed bigger than him and was clearly in a rage. But knowing about the bystander effect, Jay had a sense that pluralistic ignorance and diffusion of responsibility might be stopping others from intervening. His heart was racing, his physiological fight-or-flight response fully engaged, and in that moment he decided to swallow his fear and intervene.

As Jay walked over to the couple, another man joined him, a similarly anxious-looking stranger. They briefly made eye contact and exchanged a nod of understanding before confronting the violent man and telling him to leave the woman alone.

The furious attacker turned around and yelled, “Mind your own business!” He reached into his pocket, and Jay’s heart dropped. Was he reaching for a knife? Something worse? Fortunately, it was just a quarter. The man threw the coin and said, “Call someone who cares!”

When the man realized that the two bystanders were not going to leave, he uttered a few threats and stormed off. Jay and his fellow helper escorted the young woman down the stairs to the subway platform and asked if she wanted them to wait with her until security arrived. She declined, saying she simply wanted to go home. She felt safe on her own now that the violent man had left.

Moments later, they heard the train coming. Jay and his compatriot left the woman and walked back toward the stairs to make sure that the attacker could not sneak onto the train and follow her home. Just as they feared, as the subway train pulled into the station and hundreds of commuters surged toward the tracks, the man jumped down the stairwell once again and raced toward the woman.

He screamed at her not to get on the train, but she stepped on. Just as the doors were about to close, the man tried to jump on too. Without thinking, Jay and his compatriot grabbed the man and wrestled him to the ground. As they struggled to hold him without getting punched or spit on, they realized that the conductor, seeing the commotion, had stopped the train. They looked up and saw hundreds of commuters staring at them. The train was frozen and the platform was completely empty, but no one stepped off to help.

Jay again thought to himself, This is the bystander effect! And he realized that he needed to explain the situation to the crowd and ask them to help. He needed to break through the pluralistic ignorance and diffusion of responsibility that were holding these people in place. He did so, which led two other strangers to get off the train to help. Together they held the abusive man down until two burly security guards arrived and took over.

Knowing about the bystander effect might help people overcome the psychological barriers to helping in emergencies, as it did for Jay. But we now also know that neither the tale of Kitty Genovese nor the bystander effect is as straightforward as was long believed.6 Some of the neighbors who heard Kitty Genovese’s cries for help the night of her death did intervene in one way or another. Although they were not sure what was happening, several shouted out of their windows and temporarily scared off the attacker. Some neighbors, including a boy who would later become a New York City police officer, reported calling the police during the attack. That the police never responded might have had something to do with the fact that there was no centralized 911 system in the United States until 1968, four years later. Before that, each police station, firehouse, and hospital had its own number, and there was no standardized system for receiving or responding to calls from the public.

The bystander effect might give the inaccurate impression that helping is very rare in emergency situations. Research suggests, however, that people actually do intervene in many, perhaps most, emergencies. A recent study, for example, examined surveillance-camera footage of aggressive incidents in urban areas in the Netherlands, South Africa, and Britain.7 The researchers found that out of 219 public conflicts between two or more people, at least one observer intervened in 199 of them—that is, 91 percent of the time.

As you might expect, the more people who are around, the greater likelihood there is that someone will step forward, just by virtue of sheer numbers. But this doesn’t mean the chance of you intervening increases. It is important to understand this difference: the more people who are around, the better the chance that someone in a crowd will eventually notice something amiss and take action. But the probability of any given person in that situation doing something may still be quite low unless something triggers that person to help.

Understanding pluralistic ignorance and the diffusion of responsibility are still useful for understanding when people are and are not likely to help. If people do not intervene because they are not sure whether what they are seeing is an emergency, it leads to the somewhat counterintuitive prediction that they should be less susceptible to the bystander effect in more dangerous situations. When things are really dangerous, it should be more clearly obvious that an emergency is real and perhaps that multiple people are needed to help. Consistent with this, a meta-analysis of over one hundred bystander studies found that in more dangerous emergencies, the presence of other people did less to deter people from helping.8

In Jay’s case, his understanding of the bystander effect—and perhaps his burgeoning identity as a social psychologist—caused him to intervene while others did not. But obviously, you don’t have to be a social psychologist to intervene! Other identities matter too when it comes to helping. Indeed, simply recognizing that you share a social identity with someone seems to be a significant cause of helping.





Expanding Our Moral Circles


How much we offer help to other people, like so much else, depends on whether we see them as sharing a part of our identities. The philosopher Peter Singer refers to this idea as a “moral circle,” the boundaries of which determine who is deserving of our concern—and, of course, who is not.9 Many things that are now considered fundamental human rights—free speech, freedom from oppression, voting—have expanded over time from privileges possessed only by a few elites in the ruling classes to larger groups. The expansion of rights to women, ethnic, racial, and religious minorities, the LGBTQ community, and so on can be understood as a widening of the moral circle.

The boundaries of our identities are not fixed; they can vary across time and situations based on what is most salient. While Martin Luther King Jr. might have been right when he said, “The arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends toward justice,” the people we feel a responsibility to help and care for in any given moment is fluid.

British football (or, to Americans, soccer) fans do not have the best reputation, but they are willing to help their own. Mark Levine and colleagues invited Manchester United fans to his psychological laboratory at the University of Lancaster.10 They arrived and completed a series of tasks designed to remind them of how much they loved Manchester United and being a fan of the team. Then they were asked to walk to another building to complete the study.

On the way they encountered an emergency. A young man ran out across the path ahead of them, tripped, fell, and clutched his ankle, moaning in pain. Would they help this man in distress?

The clumsy stranger—secretly in cahoots with the experimenters—was always the same person. But his identity was not always the same. One group of fans encountered a young man in a plain, unadorned shirt. Another group saw him wearing a Manchester United jersey, exhibiting his allegiance to the Red Devils. And a third group met a fan of Liverpool, which, in the eyes of many Manchester United fans, is their greatest rival.

This simple difference in jerseys was pivotal. Whereas 92 percent of Manchester United fans helped the injured stranger when he was wearing a Manchester United jersey, only 30 percent stopped to help if he was a Liverpool fan. Importantly, this lack of helping seemed to be less about an aversion to assisting the fan of a rival club than about the absence of a shared identity, because only 33 percent helped the stranger wearing a plain shirt!

Okay, fine, you’re thinking. Manchester United fans are parochial wankers unwilling to lend a hand to anyone outside their own group. But not so fast…

In a second study, Levine and colleagues repeated the experiment but changed what the Manchester United fans were asked to think about when they arrived in the lab. This time, they completed tasks designed to remind them of how much they loved “the beautiful game” and being a football fan in general, activating a larger and more inclusive identity than their specific club.

Everything else in the study proceeded as before, but the results changed rather dramatically. Now the Manchester United fans were just as willing to help an injured Liverpool fan as they were a Manchester United fan. However, they were still unlikely to help the hapless stranger without a logo on his shirt. In other words, the active social identities of these fans were bigger than before. Their moral circle was larger, and thus they were helpful to a broader swath of humanity, albeit only those who loved football.

In some ways, this mirrors the experience of the hijacked passengers in the Jordanian desert. When they felt a shared sense of identity, they readily cooperated. But when they were divided over food, parenting, or passports, they were less willing to help one another. The same people who act uncaringly in one situation might be generous and supportive in another, and shifts in identity can help explain why.

First-aid training programs often focus on how to recognize emergencies and how to respond. But helping is not just about knowing what to do. As this research shows, it starts with whom we identify with enough to want to help, especially in dangerous or frightening situations.





Groups in Potentia


As we have seen, different situations can activate one or another of the different identities we hold, with significant consequences for how we think, feel, and act. When you’re at a football match, crowded into a stadium with fellow fans, your team identity, rather than your occupational, family, or religious identity, is likely at the forefront of your mind. You hold a set of existing identities, and circumstances bring them in and out of focus. Sometimes, however, the situations we find ourselves in may bring entirely new identities into being.

As we talked about in chapter 1, there’s an important distinction to be made between collections of people—sets of individuals who happen to be in the same place at the same time—and psychological groups of people. The former merely coexist in a common space; the latter share a sense of identity. They know that together they are a meaningful entity, something larger than the individuals the set is composed of.

Collections of people are groups in potentia, lying latent, pending events. Whether passengers on a plane, diners in a restaurant, or neighbors in a suburb, collections of people can become groups when events conspire to create shared social identities. These circumstances might be planned and deliberate, as when someone forms a neighborhood group to unite and organize the local community. Or they might be completely unplanned and even undesired, as when a plane is hijacked or a disaster strikes.

Such a disaster occurred during the morning commute in London on July 7, 2005, when terrorists attacked the city’s vast transportation network. Suicide bombers detonated three bombs on underground trains and a fourth on a double-decker bus. Fifty-two people, including the terrorists, were killed and more than seven hundred were injured.

After the bombs exploded, thousands of passengers, many of whom were wounded, were left stunned, surrounded by smoke, darkness, and debris. In this horrific situation, one might have expected mass panic—people pushing and shoving each other out of the way, abandoning the casualties in a mad rush to escape. Pandemonium. Chaos.

But that’s not what happened. British psychologist John Drury, who has conducted intensive investigations into how crowds of people respond during emergencies, including the London bombings, believes that there are four key lessons to be learned about what happens during disasters.11

First, panic and overreaction are rare. Sylvia Jacobson similarly noted an absence of panic in her account of the hijacking. Passengers exhibited shock, fear, depression, and stunned disbelief at what was happening, but at no point did they lose their heads. Second, it is common for survivors to help and support one another. Third, a great deal of this help and support comes about because survivors possess, in that moment, a shared sense of identity. And fourth, the way that emergency responders and authorities treat a crowd shapes how the crowd reacts, in large part by affecting that shared sense of identity.

After the London bombings, Drury and his colleagues interviewed survivors and scoured public accounts in which people talked about what had happened.12 Although it was not uncommon for people to use the word panic, the term was used most often to describe a natural emotional state of fear and shock rather than disordered or frantic behavior. People’s demeanor was frequently characterized as calm, orderly, and controlled despite the turmoil around them. One interviewee said:

It was quite a calm calm evenly dispersed evacuation there wasn’t people running down the train screaming their heads [off]. It was very calm and obviously there was people crying but generally most sort of people were calm in that situation, which I found amazing.



In addition, interviewees reported a sense of unity with others:

I felt that we’re all in the same boat together…it was a stressful situation and we’re all in it together and the best way to get out of it was to help each other…yeah so I felt exactly I felt quite close to the people near me.



Consistent with the research on shared identity and helping, mutual support was common. Newspapers carried stories about fifty-seven people who described helping others and seventeen people who described being helped; one hundred forty additional people witnessed acts of helping. Only three reports included eyewitnesses describing selfish behavior.

Emergencies and disasters are extreme events, but we can learn much from them about how identity dynamics operate under more normal, less terrifying circumstances. A sense of common fate produces a shared identity, the knowledge that we, together, are part of a group. That shared identity produces solidarity and the ability to work together collectively. When they cohere, shared identities become foundations on which people can coordinate and cooperate.





On the Same Wavelength


We have argued throughout this book that one of the fundamental benefits of shared identities is that they enable groups of people to achieve things that they could not on their own. In some instances, it is obvious that working together allows us to accomplish remarkable things. Unless people can coordinate, they are not going to build a cathedral, play a symphony, or vaccinate an entire population. But in other cases, it is not so obvious that working together is for the best. Surely, certain kinds of tasks are better done on one’s own or at least motivated by one’s own individual interests.

In recent research, we have started to put this question to the test and investigate what happens to our brains when we work together in solidarity, as opposed to as individuals. We wanted to examine if psychological groups of people would find it easier to get on the same neural wavelength and by doing so outperform mere collections of people—sets of individuals who happen to be in the same place at the same time.

In one study led by PhD student Diego Reinero, we invited 174 people to the lab to complete a series of quite difficult tasks.13 In one task, for example, they were given a list of supplies and asked to rank them in order of importance for surviving a plane crash in the heart of winter. Some of the choices are counterintuitive unless you are a survival expert, and it takes careful reasoning to make good decisions.

For every session, four participants came to the lab at the same time. Before we let them loose with the problem-solving tasks, we randomly assigned each set of four to either complete the tasks collaboratively as a group or try their best as individuals.

To create feelings of solidarity in the collaborative groups, we told them that they would be competing against other teams on the problem-solving tasks. We also put some money on the line: if their team was ranked in the top 5 percent of all teams, they would receive a two-hundred-dollar bonus to be split equally among them (fifty dollars each). We then asked them to create a team name and had them tap along in unison to some funky music while facing one another. Moving to music is an ancient tool for helping people feel a sense of collective purpose.

In contrast, participants assigned to work as individuals were told they would be working alone and competing against other individuals on the tasks. Individuals ranked in the top 5 percent would receive a fifty-dollar bonus. We then asked each of them to create a personal code name and had them turn away from the group to tap along to the same music as they privately listened to it on their own headphones. This was designed to make them feel that they were in a dog-eat-dog world of individual competition.

You might notice some uncomfortable parallels between this condition and organizations or workplaces you are familiar with. Many companies, schools, and even families structure their incentives a lot like our individualistic condition. People compete against one another for awards and cultivate individual identities. In open-plan office spaces, many employees don headphones to tune out others and curate their own mental experiences.

It is often assumed that people perform best when they can maximize their own outcomes. But knowing what we do about identity, we suspected that people might actually perform better when they were working together in solidarity than alone in competition with one another.

As participants prepared for their tasks, our research team placed a small headset on each of them to record the electrical activity of their brains as they completed the study. These devices are fairly small and fit on the head like a small crown. Once the study was under way, many participants seemed to completely forget about them.

As they worked through the tasks, we were able to measure participants’ patterns of brain activity to see if they were, quite literally, on the same wavelength as other members of their group. We compared each person’s brain activity throughout the study to the patterns exhibited by everyone else completing the tasks at the same time in order to assess levels of neural synchrony. To what extent were their brains firing in similar ways at the same time?

The first thing we noticed when we analyzed the data was that the groups working together as teams outperformed the sets of individuals on almost every task. They came to better solutions on the survival task, as well as on sudoku puzzles, photographic memory, brainstorming, and word unscrambling, than the average individual working alone. Being on a team consistently produced better results than working alone.

People also cooperated more when they were in a meaningful group than when they were merely part of a set of individuals. We told everyone in each session that ten dollars of their winnings could be donated to the collective. All of the money would be pooled together, doubled, and then split equally among all four people. So if all four donated their full ten dollars, each person would walk away with twenty dollars. We found that 74 percent of people in the team condition donated the full ten dollars to their group, but only 51 percent of people in the individual condition did the same.

In other words, teams outperformed individuals on almost every element of collective decision-making. The only task where teams performed worse than individuals was a simple typing assignment in which working together and coordinating responses slowed them down. Teamwork was not always the solution, but it certainly worked better most of the time.

When we looked at brain activity, we noticed a similar pattern. At first, people who were working together in groups were no more synchronized than those who were working as individuals. But as the study went on, the brains of people working together started to mirror one another. By the end of the study, there was a clear difference in the degree of brain synchrony for teams versus individuals.

Even more important, this brain synchrony was related to performance! Teams that were more synchronized had the best performance on the tasks—they were better at collective decision-making. While they were almost certainly not aware of it, being on the same neural wavelength was related to their success.

Similar dynamics are at play in the classroom, yet another place where people can see themselves as a collection of individuals or as part of a group. Led by our collaborator Suzanne Dikker, we worked with a high-school biology class to measure their brain activity over an entire semester.14 Every week for roughly three months, Suzanne went to the class and placed headsets on a group of twelve students. We recorded their brain activity as they learned about neuroscience.

One of the biggest challenges for a teacher is keeping a roomful of kids engaged as they make their way through complex material. In our study, the teacher took a variety of approaches, including reading aloud, showing videos, lecturing, and leading discussions, to help the students learn. And while the students learned, we examined when they were on the same wavelength.

As it turns out, viewing videos and taking part in discussions were not only the most enjoyable elements of the class, they were also the moments when students had the most similar patterns of brain activity. As synchrony increased for the entire group, they were more engaged and rated the class more positively. Interestingly, we also found that when a student made brief social contact with another student before the lesson, their two brains were more likely to be in sync during the class and they felt closer to each other that day. Those fleeting moments of connection seemed to put people on the same wavelength.

Across these studies, getting people on the same wavelength was key to group decision-making, learning, and cooperation. They speak to the sort of everyday situations where greater awareness of the consequences of shared identities and social connections can be truly beneficial.

But shared identities have broader societal-level contributions to make as well, particularly when it comes to social change and the pursuit of greater justice in the world. Martin Luther King Jr.’s long arc bending toward justice has been the inexorable result not of human enlightenment, but of a series of difficult battles—often led by those without access to equal justice—for the expansion of human rights and other collective goods. Change happens when people find solidarity with one another and fight for it.





Fighting for Change


Shared identities help marginalized groups and their allies organize and mobilize for change. As we have seen, it is possible for people to form social identities around just about anything. For long periods of history, however, large collections of people suffering under oppression—serfs, slaves, members of stigmatized groups and castes—have not had much chance to mobilize around common interests. This raises crucial questions: When do people who belong to marginalized and disenfranchised social categories rally around these as social identities and push for change? And what makes their collective action successful?

Human beings’ most important social identities are created around and fostered by shared traditions, rituals, histories, myths and stories, memories of accomplishments, and joys. But they are also forged by adversity, hardship, and the ways people are treated and mistreated by others. When people come to realize that their opportunities and outcomes in life are limited because they happen to belong to a particular group and that those limitations are illegitimate, it tends to generate a sense of common fate and shared identity.

This phenomenon is powerfully illustrated by a demonstration conducted by author and educator Jackson Katz.15 He first asks the men in the room: “What steps do you guys take, on a daily basis, to prevent yourselves from being sexually assaulted?” This often leads to an awkward pause. Most often, the men have nothing to say. Then he asks the women the same thing. Hands immediately shoot up, and women share the many and routine safety precautions they take every day, like holding their keys so they can be used for self-defense, checking the back seats of cars before getting in, always carrying a cell phone, avoiding going out alone at night, carrying pepper spray, parking in well-lit areas, and on and on.

This exercise reveals the very serious risks that women face (and that many men are oblivious to), but it also indicates something about how many women experience their gender identity. Most men probably do not think much about their gender on a day-to-day basis simply because being male does not put them at risk. But the enormous list of precautions routinely taken by women indicates that many women possess a more chronic awareness of their gender because of the danger posed to them by, for the most part, men.

Social identities are strengthened and are more likely to become a rallying point for change when members of disadvantaged or oppressed groups perceive the social system they are in to be impermeable and illegitimate.16 When people believe that a system is impermeable, they perceive that their place and experience in society is bound to their group and that they are not free to thrive as fully as the members of other, more advantaged groups. When they believe the system to be illegitimate, they regard this state of affairs as fundamentally unjust. In the case of gender violence, women encounter significantly more danger than men do—an experience that is bound to their group membership. Through movements like #MeToo, the reality of this discrepancy in the experiences of men and women is increasingly recognized and regarded as horrific and utterly unjustifiable.

The infamous “glass ceiling” that prevents women from rising to executive ranks in corporate life is another example of an illegitimate impermeability. However, as the term glass ceiling implies, group-based barriers are not always obviously apparent, and there are often forces working to keep them invisible. One such force is a strong tendency in many societies to attribute outcomes solely to individual agency. There is also an inclination to see the world and the things that happen in it as essentially fair and to rationalize the systems in which we live—a process known as system justification.17

It’s as if many people have an implicit belief in karma. When bad things happen to people, others often assume that they must have deserved it in some way. This can produce victim-blaming, when people are held responsible and even shamed or punished for circumstances and outcomes beyond their control.18 This is common in sexual-assault cases when the public—and sometimes even the legal system—places as much or more blame on women who have been victimized than on perpetrators. More generally, the propensity to individualize outcomes can cause people to hear about group-based disparities in wages or health or justice and write them off as individual choices or failures.

She got harassed at a bar? Well, she shouldn’t wear clothes like that. And why was she out so late anyway?

She earns less than him? Well, she didn’t negotiate hard enough.

He got pulled over and searched by the cops again? Well, if he didn’t drive that flashy car, he wouldn’t draw attention.

When people make these sorts of individual rather than situational attributions, it distracts from systemic or structural factors that negatively affect the members of some groups more than others.

Another force pushing against recognition of illegitimate treatment based on the social categories people belong to is a phenomenon known as tokenism.19 Except in the most brutally repressive regimes, at least a few members of disadvantaged groups often manage to overcome some of the barriers in front of them and succeed. Tokenism occurs when these individuals are held up as evidence that the system is fair and permeable after all. Any problems that society might have had are thus considered things of the past. Look, we have a female CEO. Or a gay mayor. Or a Black president.

When Barack Obama was elected president in 2008, at least some people saw it as a sign that the United States had moved beyond problems of race. A study by Cheryl Kaiser, a professor at the University of Washington, and colleagues found people reported that contemporary racism was less of a problem in the United States after Obama’s election.20 They were also less supportive than they had been before the election of policies that reduced racial inequality. In their minds, President Obama’s success seemed to prove that the system was just and fair.

In these and other ways, people engage in system justification, rationalizing inequalities to themselves and to others. In our own research on the topic, we have found that this system-justifying tendency can lead people to judge racial minorities more harshly and resist equal rights for the LGBTQ community.21 When people identify with an oppressive system, they are often motivated to maintain it.

To push past these sorts of system-justifying forces, disenfranchised group members and their allies engage in an often slow and grinding process of consciousness-raising. Yes, this is a real problem. It is really wrong. It is systemic. This is not a one-off incident. And together we can do something about it.

The #MeToo and #BlackLivesMatter movements are recent examples of successful—but still ongoing—consciousness-raising. Both have involved significant organization and on-the-streets protest, as well as organic online activism. Some people criticize online components of movements as mere hashtag protest or “slacktivism,” but social media paired with cell phone videos has been a game-changer for these civil rights issues.

Videos, especially of police brutality against Black and other minority citizens, have opened the eyes of people around the world to the astonishing frequency of these events. Between 2014, when New York City police officers killed Eric Garner, and 2020, the percentage of Americans who believe that the police are more likely to use excessive force against Black people than others rose from 33 percent to 57 percent.22 Similarly, the MeToo hashtag has allowed women to document and demonstrate the prevalence of sexual harassment and assault in societies worldwide.

Importantly, the consciousness-raising accomplished by movements like BLM and MeToo doesn’t affect only the identities and allegiances of disadvantaged or disenfranchised group members. Men can also be shocked and appalled by what they learn about the sexual harassment and inequitable treatment experienced by women. So too can White people come to understand that the social system is structured in such a way that it tends to benefit them (or give them the benefit of the doubt) more than it does Black people and members of other racial minority groups. They too can come to perceive these disparities as fundamentally illegitimate and advocate for social change.

Of course, not every male, White, or otherwise advantaged person comes to see it this way, and mere knowledge of disparities is not enough to create cross-group allyship. But when these shifts in perception cause shifts in identification, we end up with movements for change that look like the BLM marches of 2020, when people of many different races, ages, genders, religions, and cultural backgrounds raised their voices in a moment of solidarity.23





Taking to the Streets


As we were writing this book in 2020, protests in support of the Black Lives Matter movement spread across the United States and around the world. The protests began in Minneapolis as people demanded the arrest of the police officers involved in the killing of George Floyd. Sparked by anguish and anger at the unjust death of yet another Black citizen and rallying against police violence more generally, the BLM protests grew over the summer into what crowd-counters believe were the largest protests in American history. People also marched in cities as far apart as London, Toronto, Amsterdam, Sydney, and Rio de Janeiro.

The vast majority of these protests were peaceful, but some were not, and there were instances of looting as well as violent confrontations between protesters and the police. As support for the protests grew, so did backlash, and it was clear that what people saw in these events was perceived through the lenses of their own identities. Where some saw peaceful crowds exercising their rights, others saw unruly mobs. Where some saw overly aggressive cops, others saw officers doing their duty. Once again, identities shaped perceptions and created their own distinct realities.

But it is not all perception. What actually happens during protests and the chances that they remain peaceful or become violent has a great deal to do with identity dynamics. In particular, the responses of protesters are often affected by the way they are treated by authorities. Relations between these groups shape their senses of identity as well as norms about appropriate courses of action. In this regard, events during the 2020 BLM protests mirrored patterns observed during many prior protests.24

In 2011, for example, British police shot and killed Mark Duggan, a multiracial man, in Tottenham, a suburb of London. Following his death, riots broke out in Tottenham and then spread to other suburbs and cities around England. There was looting and arson, and five people were killed. Thousands of people were arrested in angry confrontations with police.

Although unrest spread across neighborhoods and among cities, it did not spread everywhere. Why not? A report on what became known as the London Riots found that the areas where riots occurred had higher levels of deprivation, as indicated by factors like lower incomes, poorer health, and more barriers to education. Deprived areas also tended to have longer riots and more arrests.25 Areas with riots had also experienced higher rates of police stops and searches of their residents during the preceding two and a half years.

Deprivation and frequent negative encounters with the police were an important part of the context in many locations when Mark Duggan was killed. These were places where people already distrusted the police and saw themselves in opposition to the authorities. When Duggan was shot, these conditions provided the foundation for a social identity to emerge in which communities perceived themselves as allied against the police. Unrest spread as people across London and other cities around the UK came to see themselves as sharing a common fate, bound together by their treatment at the hands of the authorities.

The actions of the police further fostered and shaped this identity.

The first riot in Tottenham did not occur until two days after Duggan’s death. On that Saturday, Duggan’s family and friends led a protest outside the Tottenham police station. The protest was peaceful until the police were perceived to assault a young woman in the crowd. It was at this critical point that “violence against the police first became normative” and spread.

Most protests, of course, are not about the police, or at least they do not start off that way. People rally to oppose an oil pipeline or a garbage dump. They take to the streets against an unpopular tax or a political scandal. The police are called in to maintain order and project state authority. Most people who attend protests or engage in other forms of collective action are there to pursue a change-oriented goal that they believe is important. They are not there to loot, riot, or take part in violent confrontations with the police.

Sometimes, of course, there are a few individuals who are looking for trouble, and media coverage often focuses on people smashing windows or looting shops because it is newsworthy. But the evidence suggests that protesters left to their own devices often stop these people or push them out. Crowds coordinate around norms for appropriate behavior and enforce them. They can and do actively police themselves. But this dynamic breaks down swiftly in the face of aggressive actions from the police.26

During the BLM protests of 2020, we saw police around the world do the right things; we also saw police do the wrong things, at least if promoting peaceful protest was the goal. We saw officers in ordinary uniforms marching alongside protesters, taking a knee, comforting people in tears, and stopping to help people who had been injured. In these situations, conflict de-escalated. We saw police chiefs provide platforms for community leaders who, while tremendously upset, sought to channel their communities’ anger toward nonviolent action. All of these serve to break down the “us” versus “them” distinction and provide agency within crowds to manage themselves.

But we also saw police officers approach peaceful crowds wearing riot gear and driving military-style vehicles. We saw officers charge at civilians, seemingly without provocation. We saw police shoot tear gas and rubber bullets at protesters and members of the media who had broken no rules and posed no threat. These actions harden the “us” versus “them” distinction and can shift norms within groups of protesters from peaceful to violent action. And when videos of these actions go viral, it can be like throwing a match on gasoline.

By aggressively treating crowds as if they are dangerous monoliths, the police induce an experience of common fate that can create identities bound together in opposition to the authorities. The preemptive use of violence by the police is often seen as illegitimate and may justify, in the eyes of many, the use of violence by protesters in return. The troublemakers that had been pushed out may start to gain credibility and influence within the crowd. More peacefully oriented protesters may now be pushed out or may choose to adopt the new, more violent norms.

Overly aggressive police responses, in other words, often escalate violence unnecessarily, turning crowds into mobs and protests into riots. Perhaps police hope that the intimidating use of force will serve as a deterrent, causing protesters to scatter and not return. But this neglects the power of social identities. When the actions of authorities are widely regarded as illegitimate, it unifies people in opposition against them.





Whose Side Are We On?


Ultimately, perceptions of whose actions and whose claims hold the greatest legitimacy influence the success or failure of movements for social change. Social movements succeed at instigating change when sufficient numbers of people with the power to make it happen come on board. In different contexts, these might be members of the voting public, members of the media, politicians, or even security and police forces themselves. By default, these third parties tend to support the status quo or at least are not often motivated to oppose it. Change happens more quickly when their loyalties shift.

The tactics used by protesters and resistance movements seem to matter a great deal for instigating change. Political scientists Erica Chenoweth and Maria Stephan examined the effectiveness of social movements in countries around the world between the years 1900 and 2006.27 They compared the success rate of violent versus nonviolent campaigns. Contrary to the intuition that deep changes come about only at the barrel of a gun, they found that over this long period of history, nonviolent campaigns were significantly more successful than violent ones. Whereas violent campaigns succeeded 26 percent of the time, nonviolent ones succeeded about 53 percent of the time! Nonviolence was twice as effective at producing change.

Nonviolence worked for at least two reasons. First, it made movements more attractive to potential supporters, helping them build more inclusive social identities. Nonviolent tactics are perceived as more legitimate, bringing more people into the movement and gaining more support from outsiders. Second, when authorities used violence against nonviolent movements, it tended to backfire, increasing sympathy and support for protesters and activists. This reduced the number of people who identified with the police and increased the number who identified with the protesters.

Allegiances begin to shift. And in places where movements aspire to change regimes—to replace leaders and topple dictators—the allegiances of the security forces themselves are often pivotal. Police officers and members of the military are more likely to shift their loyalties when they are unwilling to take more violent action against peaceful civilians and fellow citizens. Regimes fall when they refuse to do so.

It is critical to note that nonviolent resistance is not passive resistance. Groups pushing for change need to draw attention to their cause. They need headlines. They need to raise consciousness. Often this means civil disobedience, causing a ruckus, breaking the law. We may see people doing things that ordinarily we do not like: spraying graffiti, blocking roads and railway lines, occupying parks and office buildings. These actions are designed not only to challenge people in power, but to get public attention and ultimately change public opinion.

This leads to what Matthew Feinberg and colleagues refer to as “the activist’s dilemma.”28 Protest actions like blocking highways and vandalizing properties can be effective at applying pressure to institutions and raising awareness, but these same actions may also undermine popular support for social movements. Finding the right balance is critical for instigating effective social change.

The media is also often crucial. Most people do not observe protests or other forms of collective action directly; they hear about them through news outlets. The way that the media frames protest and resistance—whom they define as the “good guys” and the “bad guys”—plays a key role in shaping public opinion. And the media too is responsive to protest tactics.

A recent analysis by Omar Wasow, professor of politics, looked at different types of protests during the U.S. civil rights movement and the kinds of headlines that appeared in major newspapers.29 He found that nonviolent protests were associated with more headlines about civil rights and with greater agreement that civil rights was an important issue in subsequent public opinion polls. Violent protests, in contrast, were associated with more headlines about riots and stronger public endorsement of social control.

His analysis suggests that nonviolent protests in a U.S. county increased the number of people voting for Democrats (who were generally in favor of expanding civil rights) by about 1.6 percent. But violent protests decreased the number of people voting for Democrats by anywhere from 2.2 to 5.4 percent.

Most of the time and for the majority of social injustices, most people are among those third parties whose allegiances can tip the scale one way or the other. Even if they are the activists in one battle for change, they are the observers in many others. And as an observer, each person must ask him- or herself these fundamental questions: With whom do I stand? Whose cause has greater legitimacy? Who is on the side of justice and the moral arc of history? With whom do I identify?