The Future of Identity




In the late 1960s, in honor of its fiftieth anniversary, the American Institute of Planners commissioned a series of papers from eminent scholars and policy makers.1 They were asked to cast their eyes forward and write about what they saw coming over the next fifty years. Now, just over half a century later, it is fascinating to revisit what these big thinkers expected might happen. Their papers are generally a useful reminder of Mark Twain’s caution that “prediction is difficult, particularly when it involves the future.”

One paper was devoted to problems that might arise in the next several decades due to technological advances.2 Some of their fears were products of the Cold War, reflecting concerns about nuclear technology and the development of some sort of “Doomsday Machine.” Other forecasts seem odd, even quaint, in retrospect: worries about shock waves from supersonic jets and the dangers of million-ton tanker ships or even million-ton planes!

However, the thinkers were attentive to possibilities that have become substantive problems. They warned about growing global inequality and threats to democracy. The potential for global climate change, which they called “radical ecological changes on a planetary scale,” was relegated to a miscellaneous category of “Bizarre Issues.” But even here, they were prescient about the huge climate challenges we would come to face, writing that “long-term damage should be discernible in time to change what is going wrong, but it is often difficult for people to act effectively on large-scale, long-term problems, since they tend to be ‘everyone’s problem’ and therefore, for lack of jurisdiction, no one’s.”

At the risk of proving Mark Twain right once again, we will offer some concluding thoughts about the future of identity. Although we know better than to try to predict the future, we will talk about the role that social identities will likely play in some of the biggest issues currently facing humanity. We will discuss economic inequality and climate change and conclude with a few thoughts about democracy.





Tackling Inequality


In 2016, the average CEO at one of America’s top 350 companies took home 224 times more money than the corporation’s average employee. This astonishing disparity is symbolic of growing inequalities in income and, even more, in wealth (the assets that people hold) around the world. While absolute global poverty has declined, levels of economic inequality have increased in many countries over the past several decades. By one estimate, half of the world’s population possessed less than 1 percent of the world’s wealth in 2018, while the richest 10 percent controlled 85 percent of it.

A recent UN report3 concluded that 71 percent of people live in countries where inequality has increased since 1990. At the top of this list are some of the world’s wealthiest nations, including the United States and the United Kingdom, where extraordinary opulence exists near but often conveniently segregated from grinding poverty and economic insecurity.

Numerous studies indicate that economic inequality is bad for individuals and bad for societies. Countries with greater inequality tend to have more violent crime, higher infant mortality, more mental illness, and lower life expectancy. The same sorts of relationships hold if you compare American states; for instance, rich but unequal California has worse outcomes on these metrics than poorer but more equal Iowa. In fact, this comparison makes a key point: It seems that inequality rather than poverty is often more powerfully associated with negative outcomes at the societal level. Societies do worse when the incomes and assets of the rich are wildly divergent from those of the poor and, increasingly, the middle class.4

Vast inequalities also have the potential to affect our identities. Our identities, in turn, affect our ability to grapple with and reduce economic inequality. Regarding the former, for example, while a CEO taking home millions of dollars in salary, stock options, and bonuses has reason to be pleased with life, as a leader that CEO should be concerned. Leaders, as we have seen, are able to unify and motivate their followers to the degree that they are seen as “one of us.”

Can someone making 224 times what most people earn authentically be “one of us”?

Two recent studies suggest that the answer is no. In the first experiment, participants were presented with information about one of two CEOs.5 Both were called Ruben Martin and they were the same in every way but one: whether Ruben was or was not among the nation’s highest-paid chief executives. In a second study, workers reported the pay of the CEOs leading the companies they worked for. In both cases, people felt less identified with more highly paid CEOs and had less of a sense that they were good leaders. People evaluating highly paid leaders were less likely to agree that they “act as champions” or “create a sense of cohesion” than people assessing less well-remunerated executives—even if those leaders were identical in every other respect. Inequalities, in this case within organizations, can be divisive, potentially reducing leaders’ abilities to build solidarity and common purpose.

At a societal level, we should care about how inequality affects people’s identities at the bottom of the economic hierarchy. As we have seen, humans are status-striving animals, seeking to possess positively regarded and respected identities. To the degree that being in a low socioeconomic bracket signals lower status in society, identifying oneself as such might have negative consequences for well-being. Indeed, in a recent analysis, psychologists at Australia’s University of Newcastle found that lower socioeconomic status was associated with more anxiety and less life satisfaction.6 But this pattern was only observed for people who said that their social class was an important part of their identity and that it was something they thought about often.

More broadly, social commentators have long speculated that poorer people’s feelings of “relative deprivation,” the sense that they are receiving less than others, produce grievances that can result in antisocial attitudes and behaviors. Poorer people, for example, are often assumed to hold more negative attitudes toward minority groups and immigrants. They are also assumed to make up the dominant supporters of populist or authoritarian political movements, allegiances ostensibly driven by their economic frustration.

But it turns out that these stereotypes do not hold up to close scrutiny. In a recent book examining a broad array of evidence, social psychologists Frank Mols and Jolanda Jetten conclude that while relative deprivation can sometimes produce anti-immigrant attitudes or attraction to authoritarian leaders, “relative gratification” can do the same thing.7 Research has found, for example, that people whose life circumstances are either declining or improving both report greater support for using violent tactics to secure political power. Mols and Jetten argue that these surprising reactions among people who are well off can be motivated by a desire to justify and protect their advantages, for instance by denigrating minority and marginalized groups as less deserving.

If inequality is producing widespread societal dissatisfaction and a sense that the economic hierarchy is unsustainable, attitudes and behaviors among the wealthy can be driven by fears of losing status and privilege. This is indeed a type of economic anxiety, but one that comes from a place of precarious privilege rather than poverty. It is hard not to see some of the reactionary responses to Black Lives Matter and other movements pushing for greater equality, racial and otherwise, as driven by fear of losing status.

Thinking about social movements raises the question of when economically disadvantaged people might organize for change to redress and reverse the rising inequalities of recent decades.8 As we have seen (particularly in chapter 7), people are more likely to form a sense of collective identity around something like their socioeconomic class when they perceive that being part of a particular category affects their opportunities and outcomes in life.

Societies differ in how salient social class is as a category. The United Kingdom, for example, has an old class hierarchy. In contrast, the United States possesses something of a myth of being a classless society. The American dream is one in which any child, no matter how humble his or her roots, could grow up to become a president, a CEO, a celebrity, or any other type of success. These dreams are reinforced by strong meritocratic narratives, which emphasize the role of individual pluck and luck in life. When we believe that our financial fates are largely within our control, we are less likely to rally with people of similar circumstances around a common class or economic identity, opting instead to try to do better on our own.

Of course, people do not have to rally around an entire social class in order to push for changes that would improve their economic situations. Unions, for example, organize around the interests of workers in specific industries, like steelworkers, teachers, and postal workers. But unionization rates have plummeted in the United States over the past few decades as inequality has risen. Looking to the future, we do not yet know how the rise of the so-called gig economy will affect workers’ abilities to protect their rights and push for change. We suspect it will hinge, at least in part, on whether they see themselves as sharing a common fate.

Despite its new name, this type of contract work is not in any sense new, but it does appear to be on the rise due to modern technology. The development of apps that match workers with short-term jobs (delivering groceries or providing taxi services, for example) has allowed the gig economy to flourish. Because gig workers are essentially independent contractors, they typically do not receive benefits or health insurance, and it is not clear if they will be able to organize to pursue better arrangements.9 Traditional taxi drivers banded together and formed unions. Will ride-share drivers find sufficient solidarity to fight for their collective benefits?

For groups to push for change, they need to believe that change is possible. Looking to the future, we see two things in particular that are likely to shift perceptions toward the feeling that economic change is possible, essential, and inevitable. The first of these is the COVID-19 pandemic, which, in addition to being a public health and medical catastrophe, has thrown the world economy into crisis, the depth of which is still unclear. The pandemic has deepened existing inequalities and exposed them as illegitimate. It has also created a sense of possibility—that the future will not be like the past and that this is a moment to be seized. As novelist Arundhati Roy put it, the pandemic “is a portal, a gateway between one world and the next.”10

The second thing that probably makes fundamental economic change inevitable is climate change—the effects of which will, by most accounts, dwarf those of the pandemic.





Grappling with Climate Change


On winter days, people who know where we grew up almost always say the same thing: “This must be nothing for you, you are from Canada!” They might add “Eh?” if they’re particularly sardonic. The sad truth is that after more than a decade living in the United States, we have softened, and a cold day in New York is a cold day in New York. But another reality is that winters are not quite the same as they used to be back home either. The coldest days usually are not as frigid, and the snowdrifts are not as deep as they were when we were kids. The hill where Dom learned to ski can no longer count on enough snow to open all of the slopes or even stay open all winter.

The earth has a fever and it is getting worse. The average global temperature has risen somewhere between 0.8 and 1.2 degrees Celsius since the start of the industrial revolution, and there is now near unanimous consensus among scientists that a significant proportion of this is due to human activity.11 Despite widespread evidence for human-caused climate change, however, many people remain skeptical about its existence or importance. Indeed, even as scientific evidence accumulated during the early part of this century, the proportion of Americans who reported believing that the seriousness of climate change is exaggerated increased from 31 percent in 1998 to 48 percent in 2010, although that trend has since reversed (35 percent said it was exaggerated in 2019).12

Some research suggests that people who have experienced extreme weather are more likely to believe in climate change, but the effect does not seem to be terribly robust. When it comes to climate skepticism, it is not clear how much personal experiences matter. One factor that does seem to matter a great deal—at least in some places—is political identity. Conservatives in the United States, the United Kingdom, Australia, and a number of other industrialized countries are far less likely than liberals to believe that human-created climate change is a real thing.13

But this is not true everywhere. In an analysis examining climate beliefs in twenty-five different countries, Australian psychologist Matthew Hornsey and his colleagues found that political identity was not a significant factor in about three-quarters of them.14 Political identity tended to matter more in countries with higher carbon emissions. In other words, it is in countries where the economy relies more on the consumption of fossil fuels and where, as a result, reducing the carbon footprint would have more drastic effects on day-to-day life that conservatives are less likely to believe the climate is a problem.

Of course, we should not be so naive as to think this is purely a psychological phenomenon. As the researchers put it: “One way of reading these data is that the greater the vested interests, the more likely there will be organized, funded campaigns of misinformation designed to spread the message that the ‘science is not in’ on climate change.”15 But these misinformation campaigns need a receptive audience, and our research suggests that partisan identity provides the lens that allows many people to accept (or reject) these claims.16

The 1960s planners who tried to forecast the events of the next fifty years were exactly right about the tremendous difficulty humans have tackling long-term and widespread issues like climate change. Many scientists now say that to prevent truly catastrophic damage that could ultimately render the Earth largely uninhabitable to humans, we must keep the post-industrialization rise in temperature to less than 1.5 degrees Celsius.17

Any hope of achieving this goal requires massive political coordination within and among nations, and it is not in the least bit clear that the identities people usually bring to political action are equipped to effectively handle these challenges. Certainly, as we have seen, partisan left-versus-right political identities are often unhelpful and destructive. But national identities, the identities with which we often confront the world stage, are also often too parochial to deal optimally with collective problems on a global scale.

It is in every nation’s long-term interest to prevent catastrophic climate collapse but in no nation’s immediate interest to make the hard but necessary economic, social, and political sacrifices unless everyone else does so as well. International agreements like the Paris Accords are intended to resolve these sorts of dilemmas. But, as was demonstrated by the (temporary) withdrawal of the United States—the world’s second-largest emitter of carbon dioxide—from this pact in 2017, voluntary arrangements are entirely subject to the goodwill of the players and, therefore, to the vagaries of their domestic politics.

People cooperate and coordinate with one another much more readily when they see themselves as sharing an identity. The identities we activate and act upon are often those that differentiate us from others, whether they be based on boundaries of occupation, religion, race, gender, or nation. But, as we have seen, people are also drawn together by common fate, when they recognize that they share the same set of circumstances and are ultimately subject to the same destiny. Nearly eight billion people currently share this rather fragile rock circling the sun, and although the effects of climate change do not affect all communities equally, we all very much have a shared interest in saving it.

Can we capitalize on this? Can we look beyond our parochial identities? Could humans’ recognition of their shared identity as residents of Earth help save the world?

Perhaps no one has experienced a truly global sense of identity more profoundly than the astronauts who have seen the Earth from space. Frank Borman, James Lovell, and William Anders spent Christmas Eve of 1968 aboard the Apollo 8 spacecraft. Just months before the first lunar landing, their mission was a practice run at orbiting the moon. As their craft circled the moon, they were mesmerized by the view of its rugged, pockmarked, almost alien surface. Then suddenly Frank Borman exclaimed, “Oh my God, look at that picture over there! There’s the Earth coming up. Wow, is that pretty! You got a color film, Jim? Hand me a roll of color, quick, would you?”

The astronauts snapped a series of photos showing the Earth slowly rising over the moon’s horizon. They were the first humans ever to witness an Earthrise, and when they splashed down, they brought back with them what has been called “the most influential environmental photograph ever taken.”

In the half a century since, hundreds of people from thirty-eight countries have traveled to space. NASA interviewed a collection of astronauts and found that many of them had undergone “truly transformative experiences involving senses of wonder and awe, unity with nature, transcendence and universal brotherhood.”18 Although feelings of awe and transcendence are fleeting, researchers discovered that the astronauts had undergone longer-term changes in identity. They felt a deeper sense of connection with humanity as a whole. After they had seen the Earth from space, the significance of national boundaries waned and the conflicts that divide people on the ground seemed less important. As one astronaut put it, “When you go around the Earth in an hour and a half, you begin to recognize that your identity is with that whole thing.”

There is no way to send everyone into space. This is perhaps unfortunate because some of our most pressing issues—not only climate change, but also pandemics, terrorism, and the potential for nuclear war—might be more easily solved if we could expand our moral circles to include much larger swaths of humanity. Indeed, research suggests that you do not have to be an astronaut to experience a sense of common human or global identity and that when people possess this highly inclusive sense of self, it is associated with more support for international cooperation and environmental protection.19

It seems to us, however, that these deep feelings of connection to humanity as a whole are generally too rare or too fleeting to sustain long-term and truly difficult change. For that, we will need global leadership to build a genuinely universal identity among enough of the world’s peoples to overcome more parochial and narrow interests. Do humans have the psychological capacity to experience this vast an identity? Yes, we think so. But whether we will find a way to create it in time is a different story.





A Word About Democracy


On January 6, 2021, a violent mob, egged on by the then president of the United States, attacked a joint session of Congress in an attempt to overturn the results of the presidential election. Although they were ultimately repulsed, this breach of the U.S. Capitol struck at the heart of democracy, a violent attempt to thwart the right of the people to remove their leaders and replace them with different ones.

American democracy did not die on that day, but as twenty thousand troops from the National Guard locked down Washington, DC, for the inauguration of President Biden two weeks later, it was hard to call it a peaceful transition of power. Or to believe that democracy is healthy and thriving.

Much of the past fifty years actually proved to be a golden age for democracy. While about forty countries were democracies in the late 1960s, the number grew to well over one hundred by the end of the twentieth century. In 2011, a wave of protests that came to be known as the Arab Spring roiled authoritarian regimes in the Middle East and looked like it might portend a new wave of democratization. But that has largely fizzled, and some scholars fear we may now be in a period of democratic backsliding in which countries worldwide—like Turkey, Brazil, Hungary, India, and the Philippines, among others—are moving toward less rather than more democratic participation and accountability.20

The big challenges we have featured in this chapter—inequality and climate change—pose dangers for democracy. As we saw, the instabilities often inherent in inequality can attract people to authoritarian leadership and harden attitudes toward groups like immigrants and other marginalized communities. Meanwhile, the challenges associated with global warming, including how to cope with extreme weather, as well as likely increases in disease and the migration of populations, may also increase the appeal of strong and less democratically oriented leaders.

These trends might be amplified by technology. A recent study found that citizens’ faith in their governments tends to decline when the internet arrives. In Europe, the expansion of internet access was linked to increases in votes for antiestablishment populist parties.21

The forecasters writing for the American Institute of Planners had a similar worry. “The world is becoming so complex and changing so rapidly and dangerously…” they wrote, “that we may be tempted to sacrifice (or may not be able to afford) democratic political processes. It is important to recall that tyrants or Caesars have frequently come to power as a result of an overwhelming desire from the mass of people for firm leadership.”22

Certain ways of overturning democracy seem to be less popular than they used to be.23 The number of military coups, for example, has declined over time. But while less dramatic, eroding democracy by weakening checks on executive power or by manipulating electoral processes (making it harder for certain groups to vote with restrictive rules or outright intimidation, for example) may be on the rise.

Political scientists David Waldner and Ellen Lust note that democratic backsliding occurs when “major political actors are no longer satisfied playing strictly by the rules, losing gracefully, and competing again in the next round.” They go on to warn that “whether they can be constrained or whether they can continue unimpeded until democracy exists in name only depends on balances of power.”24

Their description highlights two important questions. What motivates some political actors to want to subvert democratic rules? And how effectively can their efforts to do so be counterbalanced by other players in the political system? We suspect that identity dynamics are an important part of the story.

Political parties and their supporters may, for example, be more tempted to undermine fair and transparent electoral processes when they perceive their rivals not simply as people with different policy preferences but as dangerous or deranged—a problem that can be amplified by polarization.25 They may start to equate the national interest with their party’s interests, coming to believe that the best way of protecting the nation is by retaining power at all costs. After all, to put your country ahead of your party requires that you understand their two interests are not always one and the same—that the nation has an interest in maintaining democracy even when your own side loses an election or two.

Voters do not arrive at these perceptions spontaneously, of course. Political elites, including politicians and elements of the media, regularly exploit identity dynamics to rally followers around exclusionary identities, increasing popular support for policies that, ironically, reduce the voice of the people. And extensive polarization makes it easier to spread misinformation, conspiracy theories, and propaganda about political opponents.

Conversely, how well democratic backsliding can be resisted by counterbalancing forces is likely to be a matter of how well they can rally a multiplicity of people with diverging interests and goals around a common purpose. Can they forge a common identity in the name of democratic freedom? Can they build institutions that promote the public good, encourage cooperation, and mitigate the appeal of authoritarianism?





Who Do We Want to Be?


The future, for better or worse, will be what we make of it. It is ultimately up to people like you, the reader, to decide how you want to engage with issues like inequality, climate change, democracy, and other social problems. We believe that understanding the dynamics of social identity is essential not only to making sense of these issues but to finding solutions.

Our social identities can make us receptive to misinformation and cause us to engage in discrimination and hoard resources for our own groups. But they can also motivate us to engage in self-sacrifice, forge solidarity with others, and generate new norms for collective action. It will, of course, take leaders who understand and embrace these dynamics to mobilize people to address these—and countless other—difficult issues. It is our hope that readers like yourself will harness identity for good.

Throughout this book, we have advanced a set of identity principles. Groups are central to who we are. The most important groups in our lives and thus our most central social identities are often quite stable. And yet we also have a readiness for solidarity, which allows us to find common cause when circumstances conspire to create emergent identities. Different identities become salient to us at different times—and when a particular social identity is active, it can have profound effects. We experience the world through the lens of that identity, embrace its shared reality, and find joy in its symbols and traditions. We will sacrifice, even fight, to protect its interests. These shifts in our perceptions, beliefs, feelings, and actions often align us with the norms of the group. And when we lead and others follow, it is often by inspiring a shared sense of “who we are.”

Despite their power to shape our thoughts and behaviors, our identities are also the site of our agency. Whether by rejecting or embracing a particular conception of ourselves, by challenging our groups to be better, or by organizing in solidarity to change the world, we take control of who we want to be.
